# Muscle Anatomy, Physiology, and Biochemistry

SAMUEL R. WARD, SIMON SCHENK, AND SAMEER B. SHAH

KEY POINTS

> The smallest functional unit of muscle is the sarcomere, which is

> composed of a variety of important proteins, but actin and myosin

> are the key elements that contribute to active contraction.

> The organization of skeletal muscle, or its

> architecture

> , describes the

> serial and parallel arrangement of sarcomeres within a muscle and

> is an excellent predictor of muscle function.

> Muscles are attached to the skeleton through tendons, which vary in

> length and extend well into the muscle belly.

> Skeletal muscle activity is controlled by the nervous system; central

> neurons project from the motor cortex to the spinal cord, and

> peripheral alpha-motor neurons project from the ventral horn of the

> spinal cord to the neuromuscular junctions of each muscle cell.

> Sensory feedback from the muscle (e.g., muscle spindle or Golgi tendon

> organ) is required for normal muscle activation and ultimately

> movement.

> Skeletal muscle is highly “plastic,” in that its structure and function

> changes rapidly in response to increased or decreased use.

## Introduction

Skeletal muscle is a large organ system, constituting approximately 40% of body mass. In fact, there are roughly 640 distinct
skeletal muscles (depending on how muscle bellies are counted).
The primary function of skeletal muscle is to generate active and
passive forces in coordination with the nervous system, thereby
allowing movement and stability. Each muscle has a complex
and specialized origin (typically a proximal attachment) and a
discrete insertion, both of which typically involve tendons that
extend well into the muscle belly (a site of muscle fiber connections) and cross one or more joints to insert onto bone. This is
important because muscles produce tension between these tendons, which in turn generates torque about a given joint. Here,
we focus on the organization of skeletal muscles across size scales
(molecules to the whole organ) and the molecular and biology
of contraction, which ultimately dictates function. Importantly,
muscle is highly plastic; it rapidly adapts its biochemistry and
structure to increased and decreased use so as to accommodate
the wide range of mechanical loads that it is placed under and
ultimately to ensure that the functional requirements across a
diverse range of activity levels are met.

## Structure

### Sarcomere

The smallest functional unit of skeletal muscle is the sarcomere.
Sarcomeres are generally defined by the exquisitely organized actin
and myosin filament lattice and associated protein machinery,
which has been very well defined, that regulates structural stability and contraction. In short, actin filaments extend from Z-lines
on each side of a sarcomere toward the middle, and polymerized
myosin molecules make a filament that extends from the middle
of the sarcomere toward the Z-lines on each side (
Fig. 5.1
). Activation of the sarcomere occurs via excitation–contraction coupling,
which ends with calcium release into the cell, and allows for a couple major events to occur: (1) tropomyosin changes its structural
configuration, which allows actin and myosin to interact, and (2)
myosin (and its intrinsic adenosine triphosphatase [ATPase] activity) and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) produce a cycle of actin
and myosin interactions that, under ideal circumstances, pulls the
Z-lines toward the center of the sarcomere (e.g., contraction).
Although actin and myosin are key players in the contractile
apparatus, tropomyosin and troponin are pivotally important in
the regulation of actin and myosin interactions via their location
on the actin filaments. Similarly, titin and nebulin have key functions in the assembly and maintenance of sarcomere structure.
Titin is a massive protein (
∼
3000 kDa) that anchors the thick
filament in the center of the sarcomere by extending from the
middle of the myosin filament to the Z-line.
Nebulin is also a
large protein (
∼
800 kDa) and helps anchor thin filaments to the
Z-line.
The cytoskeleton of muscle fibers also contains cytoplasmic actin, microtubules, and intermediate filaments, all of which
play important roles in structural organization and sensitivity to
mechanical loads.

### Myotendinous Junction

Muscle forces generated by the contractile lattice (actin and myosin) are transmitted to the skeleton via the tendons. Although
the identity and function of mechanical connections between the
contractile lattice and the distal ends of the tendons are a topic
of current research, there is certainly linear transmission of forces
to the terminal ends of the fiber (or cell). If there were simply
“spot welds” between the end of the fiber and the tendon, this
would be a region of very high stress, so the muscle has created

> Myosin

> Actin

> Z-line

> Sarcomere

•

*Fig. 5.1*

> Electron micrograph (EM) of skeletal muscle sarcomeres. Sar-

> comeres are defined by their Z-line boundaries and they contain, among

> other proteins, actin and myosin, which are the principal components for

> active force generation in muscle.

invaginations of sarcolemma (cell membrane) at its ends, filled
with long bundles of collagen arising from the tendon. These
membrane folds increase the surface area for bearing the mechanical load by approximately 30-fold, almost as if the fiber was terminating inside of a sock as opposed to terminating at a spot weld.
These invaginations are rich in matrix and adherence proteins like
α
-actinin, vinculin, talin, and integrin, which provide a strong
web of mechanical connectivity between the contractile apparatus
inside the cell and the force-transmitting tendons at the ends of
the muscle.

### Muscle Spindle

Muscle spindles are complex organs embedded between muscle
fibers within the larger skeletal muscle organ. They comprise a
connective tissue capsule, infrafusal (within the spindle) muscle
fibers, and sensory organelles. The purpose of the infrafusal fibers
is control of the length of the spindle in parallel with the larger
skeletal muscle (extrafusal fibers), and there are special motor
neurons called gamma motoneurons that innervate them. The
sensory portion of the spindle is activated by length and velocity changes of the muscle, and this information is transmitted to
the spinal cord and the supraspinal centers like the cerebellum
that controls proprioception (i.e., the position or movement of
the body). Because of the length and velocity sensitivity of these
organs and their direct connection to the alpha motoneuron pool
in the spinal cord, they are directly responsible for stretch reflexes
(e.g., patellar tendon tap). They are also involved in pathology.
For example, spasticity after stroke involves hyperactivity of the
stretch reflex pathways, although this involves lack of descending
inhibition of this circuitry more than hyperactivity of the spindle
itself.

### Golgi Tendon Organ

The Golgi tendon organ (GTO) lies at the musculotendinous
junction and is primarily involved in sensing tension generated
by skeletal muscles. Each sensory organ lies in series with muscle fibers and tendon, and its sensory endings interdigitate with
collagen fibrils that ultimately become tendon. Compression of
these sensory organelles results in its tension-sensing abilities.
The most commonly discussed function of the GTO is to inhibit
muscle force production when loads become too high for the musculotendinous junction, similar to a circuit breaker. However, the
GTO is capable of both facilitating and inhibiting contraction via
its influence on the alpha motoneuron pool in the spinal cord and
its afferent projections to supraspinal control centers.

### Peripheral Nerves and Neurons

Peripheral nerves are composite tissues that are critical to the
contraction of muscle fibers. Nerves provide an electrical signal
for muscles to depolarize via the neuromuscular junction. They
also communicate sensory feedback from muscle back to the
CNS (consisting of the spinal cord and brain). Neurons (“nerve
fibers”) are the primary functional component of nerves. Neurons
extend long axonal projections that span from their cell bodies,
which are located in the spinal cord or its flanking ganglia, to their
motor or sensory endings in the periphery. Individual neurons
may be ensheathed by myelinating Schwann cells (glial cells in the
peripheral nervous system [PNS]), allowing increased conduction
velocity. Along the length of nerve fibers, saltatory conduction is
enabled through gaps in myelination known as nodes of Ranvier.
Neurons may alternatively be unmyelinated, resulting in slower
conduction velocity. Within a nerve, bundles of neurons vary in
size and identity, and this is linked to the type of motor units
they comprise, as discussed later, and the muscle fibers that they
innervate.

### Motor and Sensory Neurons

Several varieties of neurons are fundamental in muscle function.
Efferent (i.e., moving away from the brain) neurons communicate electrochemical signals from the motor cortex in the brain to
the spinal cord and from the spinal cord to muscle. Alpha motor
neurons have their cell bodies in the ventral horn of the spinal
cord and innervate extrafusal muscle fibers, which are responsible
for generating contractile force.
Gamma motor neurons innervate intrafusal muscle fibers within muscle spindles and thus
influence muscle length and tone without contributing to contractile force.
Beta motor neurons are less well understood but
innervate both intrafusal and extrafusal fibers.
In the opposite
direction, afferent (i.e., toward the brain) sensory neurons communicate feedback from muscle fibers back to the central nervous
system. Such sensory information could include signals of pain
via type A-delta or type C nociceptive neurons
or proprioceptive feedback from GTOs (A-alpha/type IB neurons) or muscle
spindles (A-alpha/type IA neurons or A-beta/type II neurons).
Interneurons, which are neither motor nor sensory neurons, connect sensory and motor neurons in the spinal cord. They integrate
sensory information and either send information back to the brain
for additional processing or result in reflexive muscle movement.

### Neuromuscular Junctions

The neuromuscular junction (NMJ), also called the motor endplate, is the physical site of efferent peripheral neuronal signaling
to a muscle fiber (
Fig. 5.2
). Here, a pre-synaptic motor neuron
communicates with a specialized region of the muscle fiber called
the postsynaptic junction. In vertebrates, most (though not all)
muscle fibers have a single NMJ
approximately midway along

> Muscle fiber

> Nerve

> Motor

> end plate

> 10

> µ

> m

A

> Myofibrils

> Synaptic

> Cleft

> Post-synaptic

> Membrane

> Synaptic

> Vesicles

> Pre-synaptic

> Terminal

> 1

> µ

> m

B
•

*Fig. 5.2*

> Neuromuscular junction. (A) Scanning electron micrograph of an

> α

> motoneuron innervating several muscle fibers in its motor unit. Calibra-

> tion bar = 10

> μ

> m. (B) Transmission electron micrograph. Calibration bar = 1

> μ

> m. ([A] From Bloom W, Fawcett DW:

> A textbook of histology,

> ed 10. Phila-

> delphia, WB Saunders, 1975. [B] Courtesy Dr. Clara Franzini-Armstrong,

> University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.)

the length of a fiber. This configuration allows unique control of
a given fiber by a single neuron. To maximize the contact area
between the pre- and postsynaptic junction, the structure of
the NMJ is highly arborized, with healthy pre-synaptic termini
aligned perfectly upon the postsynaptic endplate, across a synaptic
cleft of
∼
20 nm in width.
The neuron is unmyelinated as it approaches the NMJ, but surrounding the NMJ are a specialized class of Schwann cells known
as peri-synaptic Schwann cells.
Recent evidence suggests that
these cells play an important role in the structural and functional
stability of NMJ.
Loss of NMJ organization and structural
integrity has significant implications for muscle function because
of impaired neuromuscular transmission.

## Muscle Architecture

Muscle is a hierarchical structure (
Fig. 5.3
). For example, actin
and myosin molecules are assembled into filaments (1 to 2
μ
m
in length), which are key elements of a highly organized sarcomere (the functional unit of the muscle, which is 2 to 4
μ
m
in length). Sarcomeres are packed in series to form myofibrils
(
∼
1
μ
m in diameter), which are then packed together to form
myocytes (
∼
50
μ
m in diameter). Myocytes are packed together
to form muscle fascicles (
∼
1 to 2 mm in diameter), which are
in turn packed together to form whole muscles (several cm in
diameter).
Muscle architecture refers to the arrangement of the functional
units of muscle (sarcomeres) in series and in parallel in a muscle,
and these features are highly predictive of whole muscle function.
Whereas muscle fiber size (which is directly proportional to force
generation) is relatively consistent among muscles of different
sizes, architectural differences between muscles are much more
variable and much more strongly affect function. Therefore understanding these structural features is of great practical importance
for understanding the anatomic and physiologic basis for force
production and movement and also for understanding pathology.
There are two general classes of muscle fiber architecture. Muscles composed of fibers that extend parallel to the muscle’s forcegenerating axis are described as having a
parallel
or
longitudinal
architecture. Muscles with fibers that are oriented at an angle relative to the force-generating axis are described as having
pennate
architecture. The angle between the fiber and the force-generating
axis (i.e., the pennation angle) has been measured at resting length
in different mammalian muscles and varies from about 0° to 30°.
It becomes obvious when performing muscle dissections that most
human muscles are multipennate in structure because they have
fibers that are oriented at several different angles relative to the
axis of force generation. Because fibers may not be oriented along
the anatomic (tendon–tendon) axis, force generation is not simply transmitted between two distinct tendons. This changes the
directionality and stability of a muscle given contraction. Multiple
pennation angles within a muscle also mean that measurement of
muscle architecture features is impossible from a single biopsy or
imaging modality (e.g., MRI, CT, or ultrasonography), because
these methods cannot account for the variations in fiber length
and orientation that occur along the muscle length.
Quantitative studies of muscle architecture were pioneered by
that developed the methodology for defining
a previous study
muscle architecture based on microdissection of whole muscles.
The parameters usually included in an architectural analysis are
muscle length, fiber or fascicle length, pennation angle (i.e., the
fiber angle relative to the axis of force-generation), and physiologic
cross-sectional area (PCSA). Typically, muscles are chemically
fixed in formalin to maintain fiber integrity during dissection. For
the purposes of this chapter, two key architectural features will be
described: (1) muscle fiber length and (2) PCSA.
Fiber length represents the total length spanned by sarcomeres
in series, and experimental evidence suggests that muscle fiber
length is proportional to both contraction velocity and whole
muscle force–length properties.
Essentially, this parameter is
important because it will determine how sensitive to length and
velocity a muscle will be during contraction. Muscle fiber length
can only be determined by microdissection of individual fibers or
fiber bundles (5 to 50 fibers). The important step in measuring
fiber length is normalizing a grossly measured fiber/bundle length
by the sarcomere length within the isolated fibers. This is necessary
to compensate for differences in muscle length that occur during fixation. In other words, to conclude that a muscle has “long
fibers,” one must ensure that it was not merely fixed in highly
stretched position corresponding to a long sarcomere length. Similarly, muscles with “short fibers” must be further investigated to
ensure that they were not simply fixed at a short sarcomere length.
To permit such conclusions, fiber length measurements should be
normalized to an optimal sarcomere length (2.7
μ
m in humans)—
the sarcomere length at which the sarcomere generates maximum
force.
PCSA represents the sum of the cross-sectional areas of all
the muscle fibers within the muscle, and thus, it is the only

B

> Muscle fascicle

> Muscle fiber

> A

> H

> Z

> I

> band

> band

> line

> band

> Z Sarcomere Z

> M line

> Myofibril

> H

> Sarcomere

H
F
G

K

> Subfragment 2

> Subfragment 1

> Light meromyosin

> Myosin molecule

•

*Fig. 5.3*

> Components of the contractile apparatus at successively increasing magnification from the

> whole muscle (A through C) to the molecular level (I through L). The myofibril (D) shows the banding pat-

> tern created by the lateral alignment of myofilaments (I and J) within the sarcomeres (D and E). Diagrams

> (F) through (H) show the cross-sectional structure of the filament lattice at various points within the sar-

> comere. Myosin is shown at the single two-headed molecule level (K), and the crystal structure of the

> globular motor domain is shown (L and subfragment 1) with the essential and regulatory light chains.

> Adenosine triphosphate;

> ELC,

> essential light chain;

architectural parameter that is directly proportional to the maximum isometric tension generated by the muscle.
The PCSA is
almost never the same as the cross-sectional area of the muscle
measured in any of the traditional anatomic planes, as would be
obtained using a noninvasive imaging method such as MRI, CT,
or ultrasonography. It is calculated as muscle volume divided by
fiber length and has units of area. Because fibers may be oriented
A

> Muscle

C

D

I

> Troponin complex

E

> Actin

> Tropomyosin

> Actin thin filament

J

> Single myosin

> Subfragment 1

> molecule

> Tail

> Myosin filament

L

> ATP pocket

> RLC

> ELC

> Actin

> binding

> site

> Light chain domain

> Motor domain

> Myosin subfragment 1

> ATP,

> RLC,

> regulatory light chain.

at a pennation angle relative to the axis of force generation, not all
of the fiber tensile force is transmitted to the tendons. Therefore
only a component of muscle fiber force [X • cos(
θ
)] will actually be transmitted along the muscle axis. Thus the volume/length
is often multiplied by cos(
θ
) (pennation angle) to yield PCSA.
Importantly, the architecture of human muscles in the upper
and lower extremities
has been defined, and these values have

> 0.5

> µ

> m

•

*Fig. 5.4*

> Membrane systems that relay the excitation signal from the sarcolemma to the cell interior. In the

> electron micrograph, two T-tubules are cut in cross-section. Electron densities spanning the gap between

> T-tubules and sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes are the ryanodine receptors, which are channels that

> release calcium into the myoplasm. (From Alberts B, Bray D, Lewish J, et al.:

> ed 2. New York, Garland Publishers, 1989. Micrograph courtesy Dr. Clara Franzini-Armstrong, University

> of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. [A through K] Modified from Bloom W, Fawcett DW:

> ed 11. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1986. [L] From Rayment I, Rypniewski WR, Schmidt-Base K, et al.:

> Three-dimensional structure of myosin subfragment-1: a molecular motor,

been incorporated into musculoskeletal models
to more deeply
understand normal and abnormal human movement.

## Physiology

### Motor Control

Motor Units
One study
described the concept that individual motor neurons branch such that a single neuron can innervate multiple
muscle fibers. Thus a motor unit is defined as a motor neuron
and all of its targeted muscle fibers. Small motor units allow high
levels of independent muscle control, but low strength (examples of this include the finger and eye [or extraocular] muscles).
In contrast, large motor units allow low independent control of
muscle, but high coordination and strength (e.g., biceps, quadriceps muscles).
Size Principles of Motor Control
Two size principles govern neuronal activity as related to the control of muscle function. First, building on principles from a 1951
study,
it is well established that the diameter of a neuron dictates
is conduction velocity—the larger a neuron, the faster its conduction. Myelin sheath thickness also correlates with fiber diameter,
so larger fibers are also “more myelinated.” However, the G-ratio,
or the ratio of the axon diameter (inner radius of the myelinating sheath) to the total nerve fiber diameter (outer radius of the
myelinating sheath), is conserved.
Second, another study
proposed another size principle related to orderly motor unit recruitment: as additional muscle contractile force is required, motor
units are recruited from small (low force output) to large (high
force output). As with many nuances of muscle physiology, the
size principle of this study
is not without controversy, with interesting questions surrounding the limits of its application, as well
as neuromuscular control systems that may perturb the generalized principle.

> Myofibril

> -release

> Ca

> channels

> Transverse (T)

> tubules formed

> from invaginations

> of plasma

> membrane

> Sarcoplasmic

> reticulum

> Molecular biology of the cell,

> A textbook of histology,

> Science

> 261:50–58, 1993.)

Physiology of the Neuromuscular Junction
Action potentials propagate along the motor neuron toward the
pre-synaptic terminal. Depolarization of the neuronal terminal
results in the rapid influx of extracellular calcium into the cell via
voltage-gated calcium channels. This calcium then initiates the
docking and exocytosis of synaptic vesicles; as NMJs are cholinergic synapses, synaptic vesicles release acetylcholine (ACh) into the
synaptic cleft.
ACh diffuses across the cleft and binds to nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) organized on the postsynaptic
muscle. Receptor binding locally depolarizes the postsynaptic muscle fiber, a signal that is amplified through the opening of voltagegated sodium channels. This process initiates an action potential
along the plasma membrane of the muscle fiber.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling
The amplitude and frequency of neuronal input to muscle dictates the frequency and persistence of muscle contractility before
intrinsic muscle regulation takes over.
Stimulus rate can be so
infrequent as to elicit single muscle twitches, such as those that
occur with the monosynaptic stretch reflex involving patellar
tendon stretch and quadriceps activation. Conversely, at higher
frequencies, the contributions of individual twitches fuse and
superpose, creating a tetanic contraction, or a continuous muscle
contraction that generates forces several times higher than those
generated by a single twitch.
Within the muscle, a network of
membranous tubules provides an electrically conductive network
that transmits incoming signals at the NMJ throughout an entire
muscle fiber. This transverse tubule (T-tubule) network pervades
the fiber at regular intervals, coinciding with sarcomere boundaries along the length of the muscle, and surrounds the contractile
apparatus with connected longitudinal and lateral segments. A
specialized type of endoplasmic reticulum forms an entirely intracellular membrane system termed the
sarcoplasmic reticulum
(SR).
Prevalent structures containing a T-tubule flanked by two terminal cisternae of the SR to form junctional complexes are termed
triads
(
Fig. 5.4
).

> M-line

> P

> ADP

> ADP

> P

> (c)

> Force generation and

> filament sliding

> (b)

> ADP

> P

> Attached

> (a)

> ADP

> P

> (g)

> Actin

> thin filament

> Hydrolysis

> Primed

•

*Fig. 5.5*

> The actomyosin cross-bridge cycle. Myosin molecules normally have two globular head regions

> (cross-bridges), but for clarity only one is shown. The

> a hinge point with maximum flexibility. Each head binds with two actin monomers. The sequence of reac-

> tions consists of attachment (a); the force-generating transition (b); P

> filament sliding (d); ADP release (e); ATP binding and detachment (f); and ATP hydrolysis (g). The

> shaded

> heads near detached and force-generating myosin heads indicate mobility of cross-bridges in

> these states.

> ADP,

> Adenosine diphosphate;

> ATP,

> adenosine triphosphate;

Terminal cisternae contain oligomers of the Ca
-binding protein calsequestrin that provide the fiber with an internal reservoir
of calcium ions. Ca
channels, termed
dihydropyridine receptors
(DHPRs), are localized in the T-tubule membranes facing
the cytoplasmic domain of SR Ca
release channels, also called
ryanodine receptors
(RyRs), in the terminal cisternae membranes.
When an action potential depolarizes the T-tubular membrane,
the DHPRs, primarily voltage sensors in skeletal muscle, transfer a signal from the T-tubules to the RyRs by direct interprotein
coupling. Ca
is then released cooperatively through the RyRs
from the SR into the myoplasm, where it activates the contractile
machinery.
This sequence of events is termed
excitation–contraction coupling.
Troponin, Tropomyosin, and the Cross-Bridge Cycle
A contraction results from cyclic interaction between actin and
myosin (the cross-bridge cycle) that produces a relative sliding
force between thin and thick filaments.
This activity is powered
by the energy derived from the hydrolysis of ATP to adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate (P
). At rest, the
thin filament regulatory proteins, troponin and tropomyosin,
inhibit contraction by masking the myosin-binding site on actin
filaments. During a twitch, Ca
released from the SR binds to
troponin C (TnC), relieving this inhibition and thus allowing
cross-bridges to attach to actin. A simplified model of the chemomechanical events in the cross-bridge cycle is illustrated in
Fig.
5.5
.
Motor proteins, including myosin, can now be studied
by single-molecule biophysical techniques, which provide

> ADP

> (d)

> Z-line

> ADP

> (e)

> Rigor

> (f)

> ATP

> ATP

> Myosin

> thick filament

> Detached

> ⊗

> within the globular domain of myosin represents

> release (c); force generation and

> lighter

> P

> ,

> inorganic phosphate.

unprecedented detail on their dynamics.
When Ca
is present,
a complex of myosin, ADP, and P
attaches to the thin filament
(step a), and structural change within the myosin S1 initiates force
production and the release of P
(steps b and c).
The conformational change in the cross-bridge that leads to generation of
force is a tilting motion of the light chain region.
Filament
sliding that leads to shortening of the sarcomere occurs during
a strain-dependent transition between two ADP states (step d).
After ADP is released (step e), ATP binds to the active site and dissociates myosin from actin (step f). Myosin then hydrolyzes ATP
(step g) to form the ternary myosin–ADP–P
complex, which can
reattach to actin for the next cycle. The concept of rigor mortis is
an insightful manifestation of the coordination between ATP processing and actin–myosin activity. In this context, the postmortem
decline in ATP means that ATP-dependent detachment of actin
and myosin cannot occur; contraction thus continues indefinitely,
resulting in the characteristic muscle stiffening after death.

### Length–Tension

Skeletal muscle is length sensitive. From the prior discussion of
sarcomere structure, the key issue is overlap of actin and myosin
filaments. At an optimal sarcomere length (2.7
μ
m in humans),
there is maximum overlap between these proteins, and therefore a maximum number of cross-bridge interactions. At longer
(descending limb) and shorter (ascending limb) sarcomere lengths,
fewer cross-bridges interactions occur and force is lower. These
regions and their corresponding isometric (no change in length)
force-generating capacities are well described. This relationship

> 100

> 80

> 60

> 40

> 20

> Tension (percent of maximum)

> 0

> Decreased length

> Optimal

> resting length

•

*Fig. 5.6*

> Schematic of the sarcomere force–length relationship, which has been extrapolated to whole

> muscle. The inflection points on the curve are dictated by the amount of actin–myosin overlap within the

> sarcomere. The center of the curve (plateau/optimal region) is where maximum isometric tension is devel-

> oped because the number of actin and myosin cross-bridges was largest in this region. The left side of the

> curve (ascending limb) yields less force generation because actin filament overlap interferes with myosin

> binding, while the right side of the curve (descending limb) yields less force generation because actin fila-

> ments are being pulled apart enough to reduce the number of cross-bridges that can be formed. Impor-

> tantly, this curve does not depict the passive tension that is generated above optimal sarcomere length.

has been studied and described in detail
and has resulted in
the classic force–length curve of sarcomeres (
Fig. 5.6
). Moreover, this relationship has been extrapolated to whole muscle by
understanding muscle fiber length (or serial sarcomere number).
Importantly, sarcomere- and whole-muscle force–length curves,
when presented in detail, note that passive tension is generated in
muscle as it moves onto the descending limb (longer than optimal
lengths). The shape and steepness of the passive tension curve is
not well predicted by the architecture of muscle. It scales nonlinearly between the single cell (fiber) and the whole muscle, suggesting that the extracellular matrix structure, organization, and
biochemistry may be important.

### Force–Velocity

Skeletal muscle is also velocity sensitive. The velocity sensitivity of the muscle is related to the ability of actin and myosin
(cross-bridges) to form and produce force while the filaments
are sliding past one another. The net effect is a nonlinear reduction in force during active shortening of muscle (clinically
called
concentric contraction
) and increases in force-generating
capacity during active lengthening (clinically termed
eccentric contraction
) and as relative to peak isometric contraction
force. Again, this phenomenon has been studied and described
in detail,
but the clinical and functional impacts are profound. First, muscle force declines rapidly when the muscle is
actively shortening but can generate tremendous forces during
lengthening (
Fig. 5.7
). Although debated in the literature, the
rationale for elevated forces during lengthening contraction
are rooted in the concept that cross-bridges are mechanically
pulled apart instead of biochemically released through ATP
and other substrates binding to the myosin head. This concept
is also consistent with the fact that lengthening contractions

> Increased length

> Force

> Eccentric muscle

> action

> Isometric

> force

> Concentric muscle

> action

> Maximum

> Maximum

> Velocity

> shortening

> lengthening

> velocity

> velocity

•

*Fig. 5.7*

> Schematic of the sarcomere force–length relationship in skel-

> etal muscle. The center of the curve depicts zero velocity (isometric) and

> the corresponding force generated during maximal tetanic contraction. As

> muscle shortening velocity increases (further to the right on the curve),

> muscle force declines nonlinearly. As lengthening velocity increases (fur-

> ther to the left of the curve), muscle force increases rapidly and plateaus.

are more energy efficient than active shortening or isometric
contractions.
Plasticity, discussed later in the chapter, is also related to force–
velocity and force–length properties in muscle. For example,
if a clinical goal is to increase the size and strength of a muscle
(hypertrophy), muscles are often overloaded via lengthening contractions through a wide range of length including the descending limb of the length tension curve. Thus the muscle fibers will
begin to develop microdamage because of the elevated forces,
and this damage is more likely to occur at long muscle lengths.

The microdamage becomes an anabolic stimulus for muscle fiber
hypertrophy and subsequent increases in strength. The practical
term for this form of exercise is “negative reps,” which refers to
the fact that very high loads are typically handled by controlled
lowering of the weight that exceeds the capacity of the user to lift
against gravity.

### Force Transmission

Force transmission (communication of forces generated by the
sarcomere to the outside world) in skeletal muscle is a topic of current research. There are two general categories of force transmission: (1) lateral and (2) longitudinal. The muscle cell is anchored
to the basal lamina though the length of the muscle fiber. Along
this length, the actin filament complex, including the Z-line, is
anchored through the intermediate filament system (e.g., vinculin, desmin, talin, and an integrin system) to laminin and on to
a collagen networks that encases each fiber (endomysium), each
fascicle (perimysium), and the whole muscle (epimysium). These
connective tissue layers are, in turn, confluent with tendon, which
allows muscle forces to be transmitted laterally out of the cell in
addition to longitudinally along the fiber (cell). Defects or mutations in these force-transmitting proteins are the cause of a number
of muscular dystrophies. The most widely recognized dystrophies
are Becker and Duchenne muscular dystrophies, which are related
to mutations or deletions in the dystrophin protein, which links
the cytoskeleton to cell membrane in muscle, which allows for
force transmission and contributes to membrane strength. When
these force transmission proteins are absent or abnormal, force
transmission, not necessarily generation, declines impairing function, and muscle cells begin to degenerate through elevated internal forces, membrane fragility, or both.

## Energy and Biochemistry

A basic function of skeletal muscle is to produce movement via
muscle contraction. This is achieved through excitation–contraction coupling, as discussed earlier, and the splitting of an
ATP molecule by the enzyme, myosin ATPase: ATP
→
ADP +
inorganic P
+ energy. In fact, ATP is the only molecule that
is used by skeletal muscle to contract, and thus ATP is often
referred to as the
energy currency
of skeletal muscle. In skeletal
muscle, there is only enough ATP (5 mmol/kg of wet muscle)
to sustain a maximal effort for several seconds. Thus the replenishment of ATP concentration within the cytoplasm of muscle
is critical to sustaining skeletal muscle contraction and force
production. To this point, while the use of ATP in resting skeletal muscle is quite low, during muscle contraction the use of
ATP can increase by as much as two orders of magnitude and
occurs with only a very minor decrease in ATP concentration.
To meet the range of energy needs of skeletal muscle contraction and movement, there are three broad energy systems that
replenish ATP: (1) the ATP-phosphocreatine (PCr) energy
system, which is responsible for the “immediate” replenishment of ATP; (2) the glycolytic energy system, which provides
“short-term” replenishment of ATP; and (3) the aerobic energy
system, which provides “long-term” and sustained replenishment of ATP (
Fig. 5.8
). While there are examples of activities
that specifically (and almost exclusively) use these energy systems (e.g., immediate: javelin throw, high jump; short-term:
200-m or 400-m sprint; long-term: marathon), most activities use a combination of these systems during an event. For
example, in a soccer match, there is an underlying use of the

> Short-term

> energy system

> (glycolysis)

> 100%

> Long-term

> energy system

> (aerobic)

> Immediate

> energy system

> (ATP-PCr)

> Percent capacity of energy systems

> 2

> 30

> 10

> 5

> min

> sec

> sec

> min

> Exercise duration

•

*Fig. 5.8*

> Schematic of energy system availability as a function of exer-

> cise duration and intensity. Energy from the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-

> phosphocreatine (PCr) system is utilized immediately (10 to 30 seconds

> of activity), which gives glycolysis time to develop and deliver energy for

> activity that lasts several minutes. Beyond several minutes, aerobic energy

> systems are required to fuel muscle activity.

long-term system that is interspersed with contributions from
the immediate and short-term systems.

### ATP-Phosphocreatine Energy System

In skeletal muscle, PCr is an important buffer for immediately
replenishing ATP levels (by the rephosphorylation of ADP)
through the actions of the enzyme, creatine kinase (also referred
to as creatine phosphokinase or myokinase): PCr + ADP
→
ATP +
Cr. Creatine kinase is located within the M line of the sarcomere
and between the inner and outer membranes of the mitochondria, which gives it close proximity to ADP generated by contraction. Another important way to immediately generate ATP
is through the actions of adenylate kinase (also known as myokinase, in muscle), which catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group
between two ADP molecules: ADP + ADP
→
ATP + adenosine
monophosphate (AMP). Because a build-up of AMP can limit
the ability to generate ATP through the adenylate kinase reaction,
AMP is further metabolized to inosine monophosphate (IMP) by
adenylate deaminase. Overall, these reactions are often referred
to as anaerobic metabolism, as ATP is generated without oxygen.

### Glycolytic Energy System

In the glycolytic energy system, ATP is generated through the
enzymatic breakdown of glucose to pyruvate: glucose + 2ADP
+ 2P
→
2pyruvate + 2ATP. Thus the breakdown of one glucose
molecule provides two ATP molecules. The glucose for glycolysis comes from two main sources: blood glucose (which primarily
originates from the liver) and muscle glycogen, which is the storage form of glucose. At high to extreme exercise intensities, there
is an increased reliance on ATP production from glycolysis, which
occurs without the presence of oxygen and, as such, is also referred
to as anaerobic glycolysis. Importantly, for the glycolytic energy
system to continue to function during high effort exercise, the
common coenzyme, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD
),
is needed. This occurs by the conversion of pyruvate to lactate by

the enzyme, lactate dehydrogenase: pyruvate + NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide + hydrogen)
→
lactate + NAD
. The
lactate generated by this reaction can be shuttled within muscle
and between muscle and other tissues and serve as an important
signaling molecule or be used as an energy source.
For example,
the lactate generated by skeletal muscle can be transported to the
liver through the blood and, in turn, converted back to glucose in
a process referred to as the
Cori cycle.

### Aerobic Energy System

Only a limited amount of ATP, over a limited period of time, can
be generated by the immediate and short-term energy systems.
The aerobic energy system, which refers to the generation of ATP
through the use of oxygen, provides a sustained source of ATP for
skeletal muscle. ATP from the aerobic energy system is generated
in mitochondria, which are often referred to as the
powerhouse
of
the cell, through the process of oxidative phosphorylation. Skeletal
muscles are highly enriched in mitochondria, with type I (or
slow
muscle fibers generally having the most mitochondria. Within the
muscle, an intermyofibrillar subpopulation of mitochondria is a
key source of ATP for contraction, with this subpopulation being
dispersed throughout the contractile network.
Specific to aerobic ATP production, the two common macronutrients (or “fuels”) that are used by skeletal muscle are glucose (or “carbohydrate”) and fatty acids (or “fat”). For the aerobic
metabolism of glucose, pyruvate from glycolysis enters the mitochondria and is converted to acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) by the
enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase. The two acetyl-CoA that are
generated from glucose then can enter the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle (also known as the Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle),
where it is oxidized to carbon dioxide and water and generates
ATP, FADH
, and NADH; FADH
and NADH are reducing
equivalents that are oxidized via oxidative phosphorylation in the
electron transport chain. Subsequently, the aerobic metabolism of
glucose results in the net production of 36 ATP (C
H
O
[glucose] + 6O
→
6CO
+ 6H
O + 36ATP [net]), which is substantially more than the net 2ATP that are generated by anaerobic
glycolysis. Generation of ATP from fatty acids begins with their
metabolism via
β
-oxidation, which occurs inside mitochondria,
and results in the production of 8 acetyl-CoA. Similar to the acetyl
CoA from glucose, this acetyl CoA then enters the TCA cycle with
the aerobic metabolism of palmitate (as an example of a common
fatty acid) generating 129 ATP; C
H
O
(palmitate) + 23O
→
16CO
+ 16H
O + 129ATP. Thus there is a large continuum of
ATP production potential in skeletal muscle based on the energy
system and type of fuel being used to meet the demand for ATP
production. In skeletal muscle, the content of glycolytic and oxidative enzymes, myoglobin (which carries oxygen from the blood
inside the muscle cell), and mitochondria determines which types
of metabolism will be favored by a muscle fiber and varies based
on the “type” of muscle, be it slow or fast, which, respectively, have
more or comparatively less mitochondria, generally speaking.

### Fatigue

Skeletal muscle fatigue can be defined as a reduced ability to maintain the desired force or power output during an activity. Generally,
fatigue is experienced during higher-intensity exercise or heightened
contractile activity, but it could apply in any setting. The underlying
reason for contraction-related fatigue can be difficult to determine.
This is because skeletal muscle fatigue can occur at any step of excitation–contraction coupling. For example, during extremely intense
exercise, fatigue arises at the level of NMJ fatigue, whereas during
moderate-to-intense exercise, fatigue can result from a depletion of
glycogen in the muscle. At the cellular level, a number of factors can
contribute to muscle fatigue. During exercise that invokes a high production of lactate (or lactic acid), such as very intensive exercise, the
H
ions that are generated by lactate production and the subsequent
drop in the intracellular pH can affect metabolic enzyme function
(and, thus, ATP production), as well as cross-bridge cycling.

## Plasticity

The size, strength, and endurance of a muscle and its nervous system controllers are altered almost immediately after changes in
use. The effects of these adaptive responses are relevant to many
clinical situations and directly affect the long-term quality of life
of the individual.

### Atrophy and Hypertrophy

)
Alterations in the magnitude of loading (e.g., immobilization or
weightlifting) induce a series of stereotypic neuromuscular responses.
For example, resistance exercise quickly (within days or weeks)
improves the efficiency and synchrony of neuromuscular recruitment.
Hence one can measure very acute increases in strength from
a sedentary state. In the medium term, resistance exercise induces an
anabolic response, which ultimately increases the size of existing fibers
without inducing hyperplasia. This hypertrophy is driven primarily
by increases in actin and myosin and associated proteins. However,
intracellular components (e.g., mitochondria) are also increased.
When activity is reduced (e.g., bed rest or immobilization), a catabolic response is initiated that reduces the size of existing fibers, which
causes muscle weakness. Importantly, reduced activity in the presence
of other systemic disease can result in a 3% to 5% loss of muscle
protein content per week.
This is a staggering figure that is difficult to recover from and is a key indicator for early physical activity
interventions—even in the intensive care setting.

### Denervation

Denervation may be described as damage to a peripheral nerve,
including through events such as a traumatic injury to a nerve, such
that it is no longer capable of providing neural input to the muscle.
Conversely, denervation also results in a lack of feedback from the
muscle to the nervous system. Beyond the obvious inability of a
muscle to contract following denervation, there are a number of
downstream consequences. There is rapid and apparent disuse muscle atrophy, such as that described above. In addition, there is fragmentation of NMJ and, over time, the withdrawal of pre-synaptic
neuronal termini and the dispersion of post-synaptic AChR, in a
neuromuscular manifestation of “use it or lose it.” A consequence of
these changes, coupled with Wallerian degeneration that occurs in
the distal stump of an injured nerve, is the progressively increasing
barrier to reinnervation at the NMJ. Based on these events, typical guidelines for reinnervation after peripheral nerve injury are to
perform nerve repairs within 3 to 6 months at the latest, with earlier
repairs resulting in superior regenerative outcomes.
An additional
consequence of these events is the emergence of endplate maintenance after denervation as a major unmet clinical challenge.

### Fatigue Resistance

The resistance of skeletal muscle to fatigue, which is commonly
referred to as
endurance,
is an important predictor of overall

functional capacity and performance. Similar to how skeletal muscle size is sensitive to use and disuse, the fatigability of skeletal
muscle is highly pliable. Training, as defined by repeated bouts
of contractile work over a period of time, is an excellent way to
increase the endurance of skeletal muscle. In fact, the metabolic
stress (as measured by changes in intracellular ADP, AMP, P
, pH)
in skeletal muscle to a controlled bout of exercise can be reduced
by as little as 5 days of exercise training.
In addition, exercise
training results in other important adaptations in muscle, such
as an increase in the density of capillaries in the muscle (which
helps increase blood flow and oxygen and substrate delivery to
the exercising muscle),
an increase in the number of metabolic
enzymes that metabolize fatty acids and glucose (including those
in the TCA cycle and
β
-oxidation),
and an increase in the number and size of mitochondria (which helps to meet ATP demand
by utilizing the oxygen that is being delivered).
Collectively,
these changes reduce the fatigability of skeletal muscle. In contrast, a decrease in contractile activity (e.g., disuse through injury
or sickness) will see a decrease in muscle endurance. In general,
this reduction in endurance (at the level of skeletal muscle) is due,
in part, to a decrease in the number and function of mitochondria and a decrease in metabolic enzymes and number of muscle
capillaries.

### Aging

Generally speaking, skeletal muscle mass and function decreases
with aging, with this process commonly referred to as
sarcopenia.
Because skeletal muscle mass and functional capacity are intimately linked to health and well-being, sarcopenia during aging
is an important contributor to decreased quality of life; this is
due, at least in part, to a reduced (or loss of) capacity to undertake everyday activities. Moreover, sarcopenia is associated with
a greater risk of cardiometabolic disease, falls and/or fractures,
and premature death. Importantly, maintaining an active lifestyle can help prevent the effects of age on skeletal muscle contractile function and, to some extent, muscle quality and mass.
To this point, it was long thought that aging resulted in intrinsic changes in skeletal muscle that resulted in a reduced ability
of the muscle to reduce force, separate from an overt decrease
in muscle mass. However, a major issue when comparing aged
and young individuals are differences in activity and sedentary
time; this makes it difficult to determine whether the decrease in
muscle contractile function with age is due to age itself or a secondary effect related to a decrease in overall activity and muscle
use. Addressing this point, studies in individual muscle fibers
from aged subjects that were very closely matched for activity
and sedentary behavior to young subjects found that the ability
of these muscle fibers to produce force and power was not different from their young counterparts.
Thus the primary reason
for the decrease in skeletal muscle force with age appears more
related to an overall decrease in muscle mass (and the number
of muscle fibers) than a loss of the ability of a given fiber to
function. Relating to tissue plasticity, muscle responds robustly
to training, even in nonagenarians,
and is an excellent way to
maintain or improve skeletal muscle health and functionality
across the lifespan.

## Conclusion

Skeletal muscle is a classic example of a structure–function relationship in anatomy and physiology. The complex functional
capacity of muscle is largely dictated by the organizational structure of the muscle and nervous systems. Initiation of coordinated muscle contractions requires activation of motor control
centers in the brain, coordinated and graded excitation of alpha
motoneurons in the spinal cord, neuromuscular communication
across the NMJ, Ca
release into the cytoplasm, and precise
control of regulatory proteins and actin–myosin interactions at
the level of the sarcomere. A robust set of biochemical reactions
provides immediate, short-term, and long-term supplies of ATP
to power this energy-intensive system of motors. Ultimately,
the system yields exquisitely controlled and coordinated movements, or stability, and is highly plastic to changes in use patterns. Although the system is highly plastic and accommodating
to an increase in use patterns (e.g., exercise), it is also susceptible
to the reduced activity that is common with aging, disease, joint
pain, and in compromised metabolic, hormonal, or nutritional
conditions. Hence, the plasticity of skeletal muscle influences
the clinical course of many diseases and, by extension, the quality of life of the individual.

The references for this chapter can also be found on Elsevier eBooks+.

## References

> 1.	 Granzier HL, Labeit S: Titin and its associated proteins: the third

> myofilament system of the sarcomere,

> Adv Protein Chem

> 71:89–119,

> 2005.

> 2.	 Wang K, McClure J, Tu A: Titin: major myofibrillar components of

> striated muscle,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 76(8):3698–3702, 1979.

> 3.	 Horowits R, Kempner ES, Bisher ME, Podolsky RJ: A physiologi-

> cal role for titin and nebulin in skeletal muscle,

> Nature (London)

> 323:160, 1986.

> 4.	 Fürst DO, Osborn M, Nave R, Weber K: The organization of titin

> filaments in the half-sarcomere revealed by monoclonal antibodies

> in immunoelectron microscopy: a map of ten nonrepetitive epit-

> opes starting at the Z line extends close to the M line,

> J Cell Biol

> 106:1563, 1988.

> 5.	 O’Sullivan DJ, Swallow M: The fibre size and content of the radial

> and sural nerves,

> J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry

> 31(5):464–470,

> 1968.

> 6.	 Sunderland S, Lavarack JO, Ray LJ: The caliber of nerve fibers in

> human cutaneous nerves,

> J Comp Neurol

> 91(1):87–101, 1949.

> 7.	 Burke RE, Levine DN, Tsairis P, Zajac 3rd FE: Physiological types

> and histochemical profiles in motor units of the cat gastrocnemius,

> J

> Physiol

> 234(3):723–748, 1973.

> 8.	 Eccles JC, Eccles RM, Iggo A, Lundberg A: Electrophysiological

> studies on gamma motoneurones,

> Acta Physiol Scand

> 50:32–40,

> 1960.

> 9.	 Bessou P, Emonet-Denand F, Laporte Y: Motor fibres innervat-

> ing extrafusal and intrafusal muscle fibres in the cat,

> J Physiol

> 180(3):649–672, 1965.

> 10.	 Melzack R, Wall PD: Pain mechanisms: a new theory,

> Science

> 150(3699):971–979, 1965.

> 11.	 Collins 3rd WF, Mendell LM, Munson JB: On the specificity of

> sensory reinnervation of cat skeletal muscle,

> J Physiol

> 375:587–609,

> 1986.

> 12.	 Cleland CL, Rymer WZ, Edwards FR: Force-sensitive interneu-

> rons in the spinal cord of the cat,

> Science

> 217(4560):652–655,

> 1982.

> 13.	 Rudolf R, Khan MM, Witzemann V: Motor endplate-anatomical,

> functional, and molecular concepts in the historical perspective,

> Cells

> 8(5), 2019.

> 14.	 Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM:

> Principles of neural science

> , ed

> 4, New York, 2000, McGraw-Hill, Health Professions Division, p

> 1414, xli.

> 15.	 Kelly AM: Perisynaptic satellite cells in the developing and mature

> rat soleus muscle,

> Anat Rec

> 190(4):891–903, 1978.

> 16.	 Perez-Gonzalez AP, Provost F, Rousse I, et al.: Functional adapta-

> tion of glial cells at neuromuscular junctions in response to injury,

> Glia

> 70(9):1605–1629, 2022.

> 17.	 Gans C: Fiber architecture and muscle function,

> Exerc Sport Sci Rev

> 10:160–207, 1982.

> 18.	 Winters TM, Takahashi M, Lieber RL, Ward SR: Whole muscle

> length-tension relationships are accurately modeled as scaled sar-

> comeres in rabbit hindlimb muscles,

> J Biomech

> 44(1):109–115,

> 2011.

> 19.	 Powell PL, Roy RR, Kanim P, Bello M, Edgerton VR: Predictabil-

> ity of skeletal muscle tension from architectural determinations in

> Guinea pig hindlimbs,

> J Appl Physiol

> 57:1715–1721, 1984.

> 20.	 Lieber RL, Jacobson MD, Fazeli BM, Abrams RA, Botte MJ: Archi-

> tecture of selected muscles of the arm and forearm: anatomy and

> implications for tendon transfer,

> J Hand Surg

> 17A:787, 1992.

> 21.	 Ward SR, Eng CM, Smallwood LH, Lieber RL: Are current mea-

> surements of lower extremity muscle architecture accurate?

> Clin

> Orthop Relat Res

> 467(4):1074–1082, 2009.

> 22.	 Arnold EM, Ward SR, Lieber RL, Delp SL: A model of the lower

> limb for analysis of human movement,

> Ann Biomed Eng

> 38(2):269–

> 279, 2010.

> 23.	 Liddell EGT, Sherrington CS: Recruitment and some other features

> of reflex inhibition,

> Proc R Soc Lond - Ser B Contain Pap a Biol Char-

> acter

> 97(686):488–518, 1925.

> 24.	 Lussier JJ, Rushton WA: The relation between the space constant

> and conduction velocity in nerve fibers of the A group from the

> frog’s sciatic,

> J Physiol

> 114(3):399–409, 1951.

> 25.	 Arbuthnott ER, Boyd IA, Kalu KU: Ultrastructural dimensions of

> myelinated peripheral nerve fibres in the cat and their relation to

> conduction velocity,

> J Physiol

> 308:125–157, 1980.

> 26.	 Henneman E, Somjen G, Carpenter DO: Excitability and inhibit-

> ability of motoneurons of different sizes,

> J Neurophysiol

> 28(3):599–

> 620, 1965.

> 27.	 Duchateau J, Enoka RM: Human motor unit recordings: origins

> and insight into the integrated motor system,

> Brain Res

> 1409:42–61,

> 2011.

> 28.	 Sudhof TC: The synaptic vesicle cycle: a cascade of protein-protein

> interactions,

> Nature

> 375(6533):645–653, 1995.

> 29.	 Adrian ED, Bronk DW: The discharge of impulses in motor nerve

> fibres: part II. The frequency of discharge in reflex and voluntary

> contractions,

> J Physiol

> 67(2):i3–151, 1929.

> 30.	 Krarup C: Enhancement and diminution of mechanical tension

> evoked by staircase and by tetanus in rat muscle,

> J Physiol

> 311:355–

> 372, 1981.

> 31.	 Franzini-Armstrong C, Protasi F: Ryanodine receptors of striated

> muscles: a complex channel capable of multiple interactions,

> Physiol

> Rev

> 77(3):699–729, 1997.

> 32.	 Rios E, Brum G: Involvement of dihydropyridine receptors

> in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle,

> Nature

> 325(6106):717–720, 1987.

> 33.	 Goldman YE: Wag the tail: structural dynamics of actomyosin,

> Cell

> 93(1):1–4, 1998.

> 34.	 Leuba SH, Zlatanova J:

> Biology at the single molecule level

> , ed 1,

> Amsterdam; New York, 2001, Pergamon, p 110, vii.

> 35.	 Dantzig JA, Goldman YE, Millar NC, Lacktis J, Homsher E: Rever-

> sal of the cross-bridge force-generating transition by photogeneration

> of phosphate in rabbit psoas muscle fibres,

> J Physiol

> 451:247–278,

> 1992.

> 36.	 Goldman YE: Kinetics of the actomyosin ATPase in muscle fibers,

> Annu Rev Physiol

> 49:637–654, 1987.

> 37.	 Forkey JN, Quinlan ME, Shaw MA, Corrie JE, Goldman YE: Three-

> dimensional structural dynamics of myosin V by single-molecule

> fluorescence polarization,

> Nature

> 422(6930):399–404, 2003.

> 38.	 Dobbie I, Linari M, Piazzesi G, et al.: Elastic bending and active

> tilting of myosin heads during muscle contraction,

> Nature

> 396(6709):383–387, 1998.

> 39.	 Gordon AM, Huxley AF, Julian FJ: The variation in isometric ten-

> sion with sarcomere length in vertebrate muscle fibres,

> J Physiol

> (Lond)

> 184:170, 1966.

> 40.	 Ward SR, Winters TM, O’Connor SM, Lieber RL: Non-linear scal-

> ing of passive mechanical properties in fibers, bundles, fascicles and

> whole rabbit muscles,

> Front Physiol

> 11:211, 2020.

> 41.	 Seow CY, Ford LE: Shortening velocity and power output of skinned

> muscle fibers from mammals having a 25,000-fold range of body

> mass,

> J Gen Physiol

> 97(3):541–560, 1991.

> 42.	 Perrine JJ, Edgerton VR: Muscle force-velocity and power-velocity

> relationships under isokinetic loading,

> Med Sci Sports Exerc

> 10:159,

> 1978.

> 43.	 Podolsky RJ, Nolan AC, Zavaler SA: Cross-bridge properties derived

> from muscle isotonic velocity transients,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci USA

> 64:504, 1969.

> 44.	 Close R, Hoh J: Force-velocity properties of kitten muscles,

> J Physiol

> 192:815, 1967.

> 45.	 Matsumura K, Ohlendieck K, Ionasescu VV, et al.: The role of the

> dystrophin-glycoprotein complex in the molecular pathogenesis of

> muscular dystrophies,

> Neuromuscul Disord

> 3(5–6):533–535, 1993.

> 46.	 Hochachka PW, Matheson GO: Regulating ATP turnover rates

> over broad dynamic work ranges in skeletal muscles,

> J Appl Physiol

> 73(5):1697–1703, 1992.

> 47.	 Brooks GA, Osmond AD, Arevalo JA, et al.: Lactate as a myokine

> and exerkine: drivers and signals of physiology and metabolism,

> J

> Appl Physiol

> 134(3):529–548, 2023.

> 48.	 Moritani T, DeVries HA: Neural factors versus hypertrophy in

> the time course of muscle strength gain,

> Am J Phys Med

> 58:115,

> 1979.

> 49.	 Ferrando AA, Stuart CA, Brunder DG, Hillman GR: Magnetic reso-

> nance imaging quantitation of changes in muscle volume during 7

> days of strict bed rest,

> Aviat Space Environ Med

> 66(10):976–981,

> 1995.

> 50.	 Akima H, Kuno S, Suzuki Y, Gunji A, Fukunaga T: Effects of 20

> days of bed rest on physiological cross-sectional area of human thigh

> and leg muscles evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging,

> J Gravit

> Physiol

> 4(1):S15–S21, 1997.

> 51.	 He B, Zhu Z, Zhu Q, et al.: Factors predicting sensory and motor

> recovery after the repair of upper limb peripheral nerve injuries,

> Neural Regen Res

> 9(6):661–672, 2014.

> 52.	 Gupta R, Chan JP, Uong J, et al.: Human motor endplate remodel-

> ing after traumatic nerve injury,

> J Neurosurg

> 1–8, 2020.

> 53.	 Phillips SM, Green HJ, Tarnopolsky MA, Heigenhauser GJ, Grant

> SM: Progressive effect of endurance training on metabolic adapta-

> tions in working skeletal muscle,

> Am J Physiol

> 270(2 Pt 1):E265–

> E272, 1996.

> 54.	 Andersen P, Henriksson J: Capillary supply of the quadriceps

> femoris muscle of man: adaptive response to exercise,

> J Physiol

> 270(3):677–690, 1977.

> 55.	 Baldwin KM, Klinkerfuss GH, Terjung RL, Mole PA, Holloszy JO:

> Respiratory capacity of white, red, and intermediate muscle: adapta-

> tive response to exercise,

> Am J Physiol

> 222(2):373–378, 1972.

> 56.	 Holloszy JO: Biochemical adaptations in muscle. Effects of exercise

> on mitochondrial oxygen uptake and respiratory enzyme activity in

> skeletal muscle,

> J Biol Chem

> 242(9):2278–2282, 1967.

> 57.	 Coyle EF, Martin 3rd WH, Sinacore DR, Joyner MJ, Hagberg

> JM, Holloszy JO: Time course of loss of adaptations after stopping

> prolonged intense endurance training,

> J Appl Physiol Respir Environ

> Exerc Physiol

> 57(6):1857–1864, 1984.

> 58.	 Chi MM, Hintz CS, Coyle EF, et  al.: Effects of detraining on

> enzymes of energy metabolism in individual human muscle fibers,

> Am J Physiol

> 244(3):C276–C287, 1983.

> 59.	 Trappe S, Gallagher P, Harber M, Carrithers J, Fluckey J, Trappe T:

> Single muscle fibre contractile properties in young and old men and

> women,

> J Physiol

> 552(Pt 1):47–58, 2003.

> 60.	 Fiatarone MA, Marks EC, Ryan ND, Meredith CN, Lipsitz LA,

> Evans WJ: High-intensity strength training in nonagenarians.

> Effects on skeletal muscle,

> JAMA

> 263(22):3029–3034, 1990.
