# Biomechanics

KERRY E. COSTELLO AND CARA L. LEWIS

KEY POINTS

> Kinematics is the study of motion without analyzing the forces causing

> the motion.

> Kinetics is the study of the forces that cause motion of a rigid body.

> These forces can be classified as either external forces or internal

> forces.

> The general unconstrained movement in three-dimensional space

> requires the description of three translations and three rotations to

> fully describe joint motion.

> External forces represent the action of objects contacting the body,

> gravitational forces, or force due to inertia of the body.

> Internal forces are the body’s responses to external forces, which

> consist of muscle, ligament, and joint contact forces.

> Because of relatively smaller mechanical advantages, large muscle and

> tendon forces, and thus internal joint forces, are expected when

> performing any activities.

> The anatomic structure responsible for joint constraint can be divided

> into passive and active elements. Passive elements, consisting

> of the capsulo-ligamentous structures and bony articulating

> surfaces, provide the static constraints of the joint. The active

> elements include muscle-tendon units, which provide dynamic joint

> constraints.

## Introduction

Biomechanics combines the field of
engineering mechanics
with the
fields of
biology
and
physiology
. Biomechanics applies mechanical
principles to the human body to understand the mechanical influences on bone and joint health. Forces that load the joints and tissues are generated by muscles and transmitted by tendons. Bones
must withstand these forces and adapt to them. Developments
in the field of biomechanics have improved our understanding
of normal and pathologic gait, mechanics of neuromuscular control, and mechanics of growth and form. This knowledge contributed to the development of medical diagnostic and treatment
procedures; it provided the basis for the design and manufacture
of medical implants and orthotic devices and enhanced rehabilitation therapy practices. Biomechanics is also used to improve
human performance in the workplace and in athletic competition.
Mechanics
is a branch of physics that is concerned with the
motion and deformation of bodies that are acted on by mechanical forces. Mechanics is one of the oldest physical sciences, dating back to Aristotle (384–322 bc), who conducted an organized
analysis of animal movement. Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
investigated the mechanics of the human body; his detailed anatomic sketches represent the birth of anatomy as a discipline, and
of mechanics as the science governing human motion. Although
da Vinci wrote extensively on body mechanics, the man generally credited to be the father of modern biomechanics is Giovanni
Alphonso Borelli (1608–1679). His book
De Motu Animalian
provided a quantitative graphical solution to a musculoskeletal
biomechanics problem (
Fig. 6.1
).
Engineering mechanics
is the discipline devoted to the solution of mechanical problems through the integrated application
of mathematical, scientific, and engineering principles. Engineering mechanics is an applied mechanics branch of the physical sciences. The broad field of applied mechanics can be further
divided into three main parts: rigid body mechanics, deformable
body mechanics, and fluid mechanics. In general, a material can
be characterized as either a solid or a fluid. Solid materials can
be considered to be rigid or deformable. A rigid body is one that
cannot be deformed. In reality, every object undergoes deformation to some extent when acted upon by external forces. However,
this is a definition of convenience that is used to simplify complex problems. For example, during the study of movement in
gait analysis, the bones are considered to be rigid bodies compared
with the soft tissues joining the bones. External loads applied to
a rigid body result in internal loads, stresses, and deformations.
The mechanics of deformable bodies deals with the relationships
between externally applied loads and their internal effects, spanning the scale from cell to whole body. The mechanics of deformable bodies has strong ties with the field of materials science and
are more complex compared with the analyses required in rigid
body mechanics. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the
field of biomechanics. We focus on rigid body mechanics.
Basic biomechanics relies heavily on Newtonian mechanics.
These laws were introduced by Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727).
The laws are:
1.
Law of Inertia:
A body in motion will stay in motion, and a
body at rest will stay at rest, unless acted upon by a force.
2.
Law of Acceleration:
A force applied to a body will produce
an acceleration of the body with a magnitude proportional
to the force, in the direction of the force, and inversely proportional to the mass of the body. In other words, force
equals mass multiplied by acceleration, or
F
= m
a.
3.
Law of Action and Reaction:
For every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction.
These laws form the basis for analyses in statics and dynamics.
Statics
analyzes the forces that occur in rigid bodies that are in
static equilibrium, that is, at rest (i.e., not moving) or moving with
a constant velocity.
Dynamics
is the study of bodies in motion. The
general field of dynamics consists of two major areas: kinematics
and kinetics. Broadly speaking, kinematics is the study of motion,

•

*Fig. 6.1*

> Borelli’s quantitative graphical solution to a musculoskeletal biomechanics problem. (From Borelli

> GA:

> De motu anumalium

> , Batavis, Lugduni, 1685.)

and kinetics focuses on the forces that generate that motion.
Knowledge of biomechanical principles can provide a fundamental understanding of the musculoskeletal system—both when the
system is functioning well and when there is dysfunction.

## Kinematics

Kinematics is the study of motion without analyzing the forces
causing the motion. Motion can be described as translation or
rotation. In
translation
, all parts of the object move the same
distance at the same time. This translation can be rectilinear (if
the path is a straight line) or curvilinear (if the paths are curved
lines). The direction of translation is typically described by the
axis “along” which the object translates or the plane “in” which
it translates. In
rotation
, all parts of the object rotate through the
same angle and direction at the same time. The center of rotation (i.e., pivot point or axis) is the single point where there is no
rotation of the object. Rotation is named by the axis “around” or
“about” which it rotates or the plane “in” which it rotates. In the
human body, most motion is a combination of translation and
rotation, sometimes referred to as general motion.
Kinematic analysis is used to relate position, displacement,
velocity, acceleration, and time. Kinematics can be analyzed in
two-dimensional (2-D) or three-dimensional (3-D) space. When
all points of a rigid body move parallel to a plane, the motion
is referred to as
planar motion
, which can be thought of as 2-D
motion. While true planar motion rarely happens in the human
body, one often simplifies analyses as if movements are in two
dimensions only. 3-D motion is the more general type of rigid
body motion, where the body can move in all directions; that is,
the body can translate along and rotate about the three axes, resulting in six
degrees of freedom.
Similar to how degrees of freedom are
defined in statistics, degrees of freedom are the number of independent coordinates required to completely specify the position
(or motion) of an object.
Position
is the location of a rigid body in space. As a rigid
body in space has a maximum of six degrees of freedom, three
translations (expressed by linear coordinates) and three rotations
(expressed by angular coordinates) are necessary to fully characterize its position. They are defined relative to a specified origin or
reference frame. Similar to indicating north on a compass, the
reference frame is essential to establish a common orientation.
Typically, this is done by denoting the positive directions of mutually perpendicular coordinate axes (e.g.,
x
,
y
, and
z
), and denoting
counterclockwise rotation as positive. For the human body, we
can think of these in terms of three planes (sagittal, frontal, and
transverse) and axes perpendicular to those planes (medial/lateral,
anterior/posterior, and vertical).
Displacement
is the change in position without regard to the
time it takes to make that change. The general movement of an
object is defined by a vector quantity that is a combination of
both the linear and the angular displacement. For many joints
in the human body, we simplify this to reflect only the angular displacement and describe the motion with terms such as
flexion/extension, adduction/abduction, and internal/external
rotation.
Velocity
is the change of position (i.e., the displacement) with
respect to time. Linear velocity is expressed in units of length per
time (e.g., m/sec). Angular velocity is expressed in units of angular
measure per time (e.g., radians/sec or degrees/sec). Because velocities reflect vector quantities, both magnitude and direction must
be specified. This is in contrast to
speed
, which is a scalar quantity,
and is the distance covered by the object per time without regard
for direction.

Acceleration
is the rate of change of velocity with respect to
time. Linear acceleration is expressed in units of length per time
squared (e.g., m/sec
). Angular acceleration is expressed in units
of angular measure per time squared (e.g., radians/sec
or degrees/
sec
). Similar to velocity, accelerations are also vector quantities,
and both magnitude and direction must be specified.
Jerk
is the rate of change in acceleration with respect to time,
and thus has been used as a measure of smoothness of a movement. Linear jerk is expressed in units of length per time cubed
(e.g., m/sec
). Angular jerk is expressed in units of angular measure
per time cubed (e.g., radians/sec
or degrees/sec
). Jerk quantifies
the rate at which acceleration changes; acceleration is the rate of
change of velocity, which is the rate of change of position. Thus
initiating a movement to change position requires changes in
velocity, acceleration, and jerk.
In addition to the above kinematic measures, there are common
spatiotemporal parameters
recorded during tasks such as walking.
These measures capture either distance or time, and sometimes are
converted to percentages. For example, step length is the distance
between the heel of one foot when it contacts the ground and the
heel of the contralateral foot when it contacts the ground; stride
length is the distance between where one foot contacts the ground
and where the same (ipsilateral) foot contacts the ground again. As
such, one stride contains two steps and is considered a complete
gait cycle.
Step time and stride time would refer to the duration
of time for each of these. Similarly, the time (and percentage of
a gait cycle) spent with both feet on the ground is double limb
support, and the time with only one foot on the ground is single
limb support. Alterations in these parameters, either within an
individual side-to-side or over time, or between individuals, can
suggest impairments in function.
Kinematic techniques have been used to study movements in
both 2-D and 3-D space. Independent of the technology used to
capture the movement, the human body is typically modeled as a
number of interconnected rigid body segments (
Fig. 6.2
). Each
rigid body segment has a coordinate system defined for it to establish an anatomic coordinate system. Segment position is typically
defined by the orientation of the segment coordinate system relative to a global (or lab) coordinate system that is external to the
body. For example, the position and motion of the pelvis is often
described without reference to the body segments above or below.
This is in contrast to joint position and motion, which is typically
described as the relative motion of the distal body segment with
respect to the proximal body segment. For example, knee motion
is described as the motion of the shank relative to the thigh, and
hip motion is the motion of the thigh relative to the pelvis. While
each body segment has six degrees of freedom, most joints are
assumed to undergo primarily angular displacement (i.e., rotation) during human movement. However, more complex analyses
may also quantify the linear displacement (i.e., translation) that
limb segments or joints may undergo.
These measures of segment and joint angles have been used
extensively to describe human walking and other activities of daily
living.
For example, during walking, knee motion primarily
occurs in the sagittal plane about a mediolateral axis and can be
characterized throughout the gait cycle (
Fig. 6.3
). At initial contact, the knee is near full extension (in about five degrees of knee
flexion). As the limb is loaded, the knee flexes to about 15 degrees
and then moves back into extension by the middle of stance. At
50% of the gait cycle, the contralateral (i.e., opposite) foot contacts the ground. As the weight is shifted to the opposite limb, the
knee begins to flex again. The foot leaves the ground around 60%

> A

> z

> y

> x

> B

> z

> T

> T

> T

> y

> y

> S

> S

> S

> x

•

*Fig. 6.2*

> The kinematic technique used to study body movement in

> three-dimensional space. Body-fixed reflective markers are used to

> establish anatomic coordinate systems for each body segment. (A) Video

> camera measurement systems calculate the location of external markers

> placed on the body segments and aligned with specific bony landmarks.

> A body-fixed external (“technical”) coordinate system is then computed

> from three or more markers on each body segment for the three orthogo-

> nal directions (i.e.,

> x

> ,

> y

> , and

> z

> ). (B) An anatomic coordinate system is

> defined with person-specific anatomic landmarks (e.g., the medial and

> lateral femoral epicondyles, and the medial and lateral malleoli). The ana-

> tomic coordinate system for the thigh (T) and shank (S) is shown for the

> three directions (i.e.,

> x

> ,

> y

> , and

> z

> ). The relationship between the technical

> and anatomic coordinate systems allows for movement to be described

> in anatomic planes. (From Kaufman KR: Objective assessment of pos-

> ture and gait. In Bronstein AM, Brandt T, Marjorie H, editors:

> Clinical dis-

> orders of balance, posture, and gait

> . Oxford, England, A Hodder Arnold

> Publication, 2004.)

of the gait cycle, ending the stance phase. During the swing phase,
the knee continues to flex, with peak knee flexion occurring during the early portion of the swing phase. The knee then returns
to near full extension before initial contact, and the cycle repeats.
Thus the knee has two phases of flexion and extension motion,
one during stance and one during swing. Each starts with the knee
in relative extension, progresses into flexion, and then returns to
extension. The first flexion phase, or stance phase knee flexion,
acts as a shock absorber to aid weight acceptance. This curve
peaks in early stance when the opposite foot leaves the ground.

> 60

> 50

> 40

> 30

> 20

> Knee angle (degrees)

> 10

> 0

> 20

> 40

> 60

> 80

> 100

> 0

> Gait cycle (%)

•

*Fig. 6.3*

> Knee sagittal plane motion throughout the gait cycle. A positive

> value indicates knee flexion. For the first 60% of the gait cycle, the leg is in

> stance. The leg is in swing phase for the remainder of the gait cycle. (From

> Neumann DA:

> Kinesiology of the musculoskeletal system: foundations for

> physical rehabilitation

> , ed 2, St Louis, 2010, Mosby, Fig. 15.6.)

The mechanical source for this shock absorber is the eccentrically
contracting quadriceps muscles; that is, the quadriceps muscles are
resisting the knee flexion. The second flexion phase is necessary
for the foot to clear the ground in the early swing phase. The knee
rapidly flexes beginning just after the heel comes off the ground
to a maximum in the swing phase as the swinging foot passes the
opposite (stance) limb. While the motion at the knee during gait
primarily occurs in the sagittal plane, other joints may exhibit
motion in multiple planes.
The complexity of kinematic analysis increases substantially
when one moves from simplified planar analysis to 3-D analysis. While 3-D joint movement is described as motion of the distal segment relative to the proximal segment, in the same way it
is done for 2-D, the sequence of rotations is extremely important and must be specified for a unique description of 3-D joint
motion.
For the exact same rotations, different final orientations
will result from different sequences of rotation (
Fig. 6.4
). Investigators in orthopedic biomechanics have adopted the concept of
Euler angles to unify the definition of finite spatial rotation.
In
this definition, one axis is fixed to the proximal segment (e.g., knee
flexion-extension is defined about an axis through the medial and
lateral femoral epicondyles), and one axis is fixed to the distal segment (e.g., internal/external rotation of the knee is defined about
the long axis of the tibia) (
Fig. 6.5
). The final “floating axis” is
defined as orthogonal to the other two axes (e.g., knee abduction/
adduction is defined about an axis that is at a 90-degree angle relative both to the flexion/extension axis and to the internal/external
rotation axis). Using a specified sequence of rotations allows for
the joint motion to be related to anatomic structures.
Human movement is often measured within a motion-capture
laboratory using an optical motion capture system. The specific
technology differs between systems but, generally, cameras around
the room record the position of markers placed in pre-specified
locations on the individual (
Fig. 6.2
). These markers may be passive (meaning that they reflect light back to the cameras) or active
•

*Fig. 6.4*

> Sequence dependence of rigid body motion. Each die under-

> goes two rotations: one about the axis pointing up and one about the axis

> pointing to the right. The sequence of these rotations differs in the top and

> bottom rows. The final orientation is different between the die demonstrat-

> ing the effect of order of rotations.

> r

> = [T]

> p

> + r

> where

> I

> [T] = [T

> ][T

> ][T

> ]

> J

> K

> e

> e

> Plane of

> flexion/

> Plane of

> i

> extension

> ϕ

> j

> abduction-

> (fixed to femur)

> adduction

> θ

> (floating axis)

> k

> e

> Plane of axial

> rotation

> ψ

> (fixed to tibia)

•

*Fig. 6.5*

> Description of knee joint motion using the Eulerian angle system.

> An axis fixed to the distal femur defines flexion/extension motion. An axis

> fixed to the proximal tibia along its anatomic axis defines internal external

> rotation. A floating axis, which is orthogonal to the other two axes (i.e., at

> 90 degrees to the other axes), is used to measure abduction-adduction.

> (From Chao EYS: Justification of triaxial goniometer for the measurement

> of joint rotation,

> J Biomech

> 13:989-1006, 1980.)

(meaning that the marker is the light source). Markers are typically placed over specific bony landmarks to help define joint locations and axes. Markers are also placed at other locations on the
segment to track its location in space. Initially, a marker at the end
but, more recently, multiple markers either
of a wand was used
directly on the skin or as a rigid cluster are used to track segment
position.
While the accuracy of the camera systems can be quite good,
the ability of markers placed on a wand, or even directly on the
skin, to accurately reflect the movement of the bones underlying the skin and soft tissue is less well accepted or standardized.
Skin-motion artifact is a well-documented challenge, and one

that substantially affects the quality of the data in situations of
increased adiposity. Markers used to define axes of rotation can be
difficult to place accurately and reliably for some joints such as the
hip. Thus movements can be used instead of markers to infer joint
axes. This is commonly referred to as a “functional joint.” Regression equations have also been used to predict joint locations. The
joint locations predicted by equations are affected not only by the
position of the markers but also by variation in anatomy between
individuals. Inaccurate definitions of joint axes can lead to “kinematic crosstalk,” where motion in one plane is interpreted as if it
were in another plane. Additionally, transverse plane motion of
the extremities (e.g., internal [medial] and external [lateral] rotation) is less accurate than sagittal and frontal plane motion. This
is, in part, due to the shorter distance between the axis of rotation
and the marker on the segment. The challenge of detecting rotation from markers near the axis of rotation is one argument for
continuing to use markers placed on a wand.
Although transverse plane motion is often of interest for clinical questions, it is
frequently omitted from analysis due to this challenge.
A complete analysis of total joint movement (i.e., capturing all
six degrees of freedom) is less common. Data for these analyses has
been obtained using markers embedded in the bone.
These
data can be obtained using imaging techniques such as dual fluoroscopic imaging.
This general unconstrained movement in
3-D space requires the specification of three translations and three
rotations to fully describe joint motion (e.g., at the knee: lateral
tibial translation, anterior tibial translation, knee joint distraction,
flexion, adduction, and external rotation) and can also be represented by a helical (screw) axis.
Newer technologies provide alternative methods for measuring spatiotemporal gait parameters and kinematics. “Markerless”
motion capture utilizes standard or high-speed video cameras to
record motion without the need for markers placed by experienced personnel.
These videos are often processed using software that employs deep learning, a type of machine learning that
does not require human input to select important features from
the data. Deep learning algorithms estimate the pose (body segment positions) in each frame of video data, from which joint
angles can be calculated. The quality of data from both markered
(optical) and markerless motion-capture systems is dependent on
factors such as the number of cameras and their resolution. Compared with markered motion capture, markerless motion capture
removes user error related to marker placement and improves data
collection speed. However, the software is crucially important for
the quality of the processed data and requires greater computing resources to run. Data quality can be affected by the number
of key points identified per body segment and the quality of the
training data used to develop the software, as well as the match
between the training data and the new data (e.g., similar movements, participant/patient demographics, etc.). The use of software, rather than markers placed by individuals, to identify key
points on body segments also means that raw video data can be
reprocessed following any future software updates to improve data
quality. Thus understanding the limitations of software versions is
important in making comparisons with this type of data.
Wearable technology (e.g., accelerometers, gyroscopes, magnetometers, inertial measurement units attached to the body)
has also been explored as a method for measuring kinematics due
to its ease of use and potential to be used both in and outside
of a laboratory or clinical environment.
These small sensors
are typically attached to one or more body segments to measure
segment acceleration, angular velocity, and/or other parameters.
Multiple sensors placed on different body segments typically
produce the most accurate estimation of joint kinematics; however, single sensors can also be used to capture clinically relevant
parameters, such as varus thrust.
Each type of sensor comes
with its own limitations. For example, gyroscopes measure angular velocity well but can experience problems with signal drift
over time.
Data quality can also be affected by surrounding
equipment; magnetometers, for example, can be affected by
nearby ferromagnetic objects.
These limitations can sometimes
be mitigated by combining different types of sensors; however,
this technology is rapidly changing, and users should be aware
of the capabilities and limitations of the specific technologies
they are working with. Combining wearable technologies with
electronic health records, mobile health applications, and so on
(called
digital health
) has been suggested as a way to improve
health care delivery in rheumatology.

## Kinetics

Kinetics is the study of the forces that cause motion of an object. A
force
is a push or a pull on an object. Forces are vectors: they have
magnitude and direction. The magnitude represents how strong
the force is and is commonly expressed in Newtons or pounds.
The direction of the vector can be resolved into the individual
components, usually along specified, mutually perpendicular
coordinate axes. Conversely, force components can be summed
using vector addition to obtain the resultant force, which is the
overall total or net force.
Forces have a point of application: the location along the body
at which the force is applied. Forces can be contact forces (as when
bodies touch each other) or field forces (as when bodies are separated by a distance, such as gravitational, electric, or magnetic
forces).
Forces can generally be classified as being external or internal.
External forces are those produced outside the body; this includes
actions of objects contacting the body, gravitation force, and
forces due to inertia of the body. Internal forces are those produced within the body and include muscle, capsulo-ligamentous
structures, and joint contact forces.
When a force is applied at some distance from the axis of rotation, the force has a rotational effect called a
moment.
A moment
represents the turning or twisting effect of a force and, mathematically, is defined as the cross product of the force vector and the
distance vector to the axis of rotation. Moments are commonly
expressed in Newton-meters (Nm) or foot pounds (ft-lb). Like
a force, a moment is also a vector, and thus has both magnitude
and direction. The magnitude of the moment is equal to the force
multiplied by the perpendicular (or shortest) distance between the
line of action of the force and the axis of rotation (
Fig. 6.6
). The
direction of the moment is about the axis of rotation (or potential
rotation) and, thus, perpendicular to the plane in which the rotating force is applied. Two different terms are commonly used to
describe the distance between the force and the axis of rotation.
Although inconsistent in the literature,
moment arm
is often used
to describe the perpendicular (or shortest) distance from the force
action line to the actual or potential pivot point of the system, as
used above to calculate the moment.
Lever arm
is used to describe
the distance along the lever (i.e., rigid segment) between the force
action line and the actual or potential pivot point of the system.
When the force is perpendicular to the segment, the moment arm
and lever arm will be equivalent; otherwise, the moment arm will
be shorter than the lever arm.

> A

> Force (F)

> M

> Moment arm

> Lever arm

> B

> M

> Moment arm

> Force (F)

> Lever arm

•

*Fig. 6.6*

> The moment (M) of a force (F) about an axis is equal to the force

> times the moment arm. The moment arm is the perpendicular distance

> (i.e., shortest distance) between the axis and the line of action of the force.

> The lever arm is the distance along the segment to the axis of rotation.

> When the force is perpendicular to the segment (A), the moment arm and

> lever arm will be equivalent. When the force is not perpendicular to the

> segment (B), the moment arm will be shorter than the lever arm.

When evaluating the rotational capacity of a muscle, a change
in a segment’s position can change the moment arm of a force.
A change in the segment’s shape (e.g., osteotomy) or location of
muscle insertion (e.g., tendon transfer) would change the lever
arm in all positions and the moment arm for a given position.
While the terms “moment” and “torque” are often used interchangeably, a distinction is sometimes made to specify torque as a
type of moment that results when a pair of forces acting on a
body are equal in magnitude, have parallel lines of action, and act
in opposite directions (
Fig. 6.7
). This is sometimes referred to as a
force couple.
The magnitude of the torque is the force multiplied by
the distance—in this case, the distance is the perpendicular distance
between the lines of action of the two forces. The resultant force on
the body is zero because the two forces are equal and oppose each
other; however, they create an axis of rotation between them.
When applying these terms to human movement, multiple
simplifications are made for the ease of analysis and interpretation.
The bones are modeled as rigid bodies that do not deform under
load. Joints are often modeled as hinges. Unlike a true mechanical hinge, the axis of rotation may not be a single fixed point;
instead, it may change throughout the movement and may also be
impacted by pathology. The joint is assumed to be frictionless; this
too can be affected by pathology (e.g., osteoarthritis [OA]). The

> y

> F

> d

> –F

> x

> 0

•

*Fig. 6.7*

> A torque, or force couple, is created by two equal, noncollinear,

> and parallel but oppositely directed forces, F and −F. The magnitude of

> the torque is Fd, where

> d

> is the perpendicular distance between the two

> forces.

muscles are thought of as force vectors applied where the muscle
attaches to the bone. These muscle forces can produce a moment
(i.e., rotation) because a constraining force is applied at the joint
to create the axis of rotation. This constraining force, also referred
to as the joint contact force, is provided by both passive and active
structures (e.g., the articular surface, capsulo-ligamentous structures, and muscles) and is in response to all other forces acting on
the system. As most muscles insert close to the joint, the moment
arm for a muscle is often quite small relative to the moment arm
for an external force acting farther from the axis of rotation (e.g.,
biceps tendon insertion near the elbow vs. weight held in the
hand). This smaller
mechanical advantage
of the internal (muscle)
force relative to the external force necessitates large muscle and
tendon forces, and subsequently large forces at the joint when
performing any activity. For example, during natural walking,
the total force at the hip (including the force generated by the
surrounding muscles) has been measured at four times the body
weight.
If not considering the force on the joint exerted by the
muscles, this joint force would be much lower.
While the terminology, again, is inconsistent, with terms including “joint reaction
force,” “joint bone-to-bone force,” and “joint contact force,” the
important distinction is whether the force includes the contribution from muscles and ligaments crossing the joint
or if it simply
reflects the forces from the adjacent segment (i.e., intersegmental
force). Although the intersegmental force is important for calculations, the forces that the joint experiences, here referred to as
joint
contact force
, are often of more interest for the clinician.
Just as forces can be classified as external or internal, so can
moments. External forces create external moments; internal forces
create internal moments, which are also called muscle moments.
When interpreting data and the literature, it is critical to understand
this distinction. For example, the external knee adduction moment
is an external moment
implicated in the progression of knee OA
generated by the ground reaction force (GRF) passing medial to the
knee axis of rotation. If the external moment were the only one
acting on the knee, the distal tibia would rotate inward, creating
knee adduction. However, in response to the external knee adduction moment, the knee generates an internal abduction moment to
oppose the external knee adduction moment.

### Statics

Statics is the study of forces acting on a body at rest; that is, a
body that is not accelerating. When performing a force analysis,
the body or part of a body at equilibrium may be isolated from

> Body

> weight

> Center

> of

> mass

> 1/2 Body

> 1/2 Body

> Ground

> weight

> weight

> reaction force

### A B

•

*Fig. 6.8*

> Static force equilibrium. (A) When a person stands quietly with the body weight evenly distrib-

> uted on both feet, that person can be considered to be in static equilibrium. (B) The loads under each foot

> can be combined into a single ground reaction force (GRF) equal to the sum of the forces under the two

> feet and located directly under the center of mass (COM), with a force equal to body weight. The GRF is

> located approximately midway between the two feet. (C) As body weight is shifted laterally, the GRF also

> shifts to remain under the COM. (D) If the person stands on one foot, the person shifts their COM over their

> base of support (i.e., the foot on the ground). (From Davis RB, Kaufman KR: Kinetics of normal walking.

> In Rose J, Gamble JG, editors:

> Human walking

> , ed 3, Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.)

the environment. The environment is then replaced by forces acting on the system, resulting in what is called a
free-body diagram.
For the body to be at rest (i.e., acceleration equal to zero), both
the forces and the moments acting on the body must sum to zero
in each of the three orthogonal (i.e., perpendicular) directions of
the chosen reference system. Specifically, based on Newton’s First
Law:
Σ
F
= 0
Σ
M
= 0

where
Σ
F
is the sum of forces in each of three orthogonal directions and
Σ
M
is the sum of moments about each of the three
orthogonal axes.
For example, consider a person standing quietly (
Fig. 6.8
). The
person’s weight (force of gravity) tends to pull the person toward
the ground (
Fig. 6.8A
). The person does not move downward
through the ground, however, because the ground is also pushing
up on the person with a total force equal in magnitude (and opposite in direction) to the individual’s weight (Newton’s Third Law).
If the person has their weight distributed symmetrically, then their
weight is evenly shared by each lower extremity (
Fig. 6.8A
). The
load under each foot can be represented by resultant GRF vectors,

> Ground

> Ground

> reaction force

> reaction force

### C D

with one-half of the body weight supported by each foot. The
base
of support
is the area between the feet, including the contact area
under the feet. With one-half of body weight supported by each
foot, the point of application of the resultant GRF passes approximately midway between the individual’s two feet (
Fig. 6.8B
). No
motion occurs because the external forces (i.e., body weight and
the GRF) are balanced—they are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. When the person leans to one side (
Fig. 6.8C
),
the GRF location shifts in the direction that the person leans,
which maintains this balance of forces. Thus overall body posture
can affect the GRF location. If the person were to pick up one
foot, they would become unstable; that is, the downward body
weight vector would no longer be over the base of support, which
now is only the single foot on the ground, but instead would be
medial to it. To remain in static equilibrium, the individual would
need to shift their body weight over the stance foot (
Fig. 6.8D
).
This example also highlights the force needed from the hip
abductors to maintain a level pelvis in single limb stance (
Fig. 6.9
).
The GRF passes medial to the hip joint axis of rotation, creating
an external hip adduction moment. To maintain static equilibrium, the hip abductor muscles generate an internal moment that
is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction; that is, the hip
muscles must generate a hip abduction moment. If the muscles

> Body

> weight

> (BW)

> Internal hip

> abductor moment

> Center

> (counterclockwise)

> of mass

> Hip abductor

> force

> External hip

> adductor moment

> (clockwise)

•

*Fig. 6.9*

> Hip abductor force to maintain a level pelvis in single limb stance.

> When the ground reaction force passes medial to the hip joint, it creates an

> external hip adduction moment tending to rotate the pelvis clockwise. To

> maintain static equilibrium, the hip abductor muscles generate an internal

> hip abduction moment. If the hip abductor muscles generate an internal

> moment that is equal to the external moment, the individual remains in

> static equilibrium with the pelvis level.

> A: POSITIVE

> 1. Increased moment

> arm (D

> ′

> ) for hip

> abductor force.

> NORMAL ANGLE ( )

> D´

> 2. Alignment may

> improve

> INCLINATION (125°)

> joint stability.

> D

> COXA VARA

> (90°)

> B: NEGATIVE

> 1. Increased bending

> moment arm (l

> ′

> )

> increases bending

> moment (ACF

> ×

> l

> ′

> );

> increases shear force

> across femoral neck.

> l´

> 2. Decreased functional

> length of hip abductor

> muscles.

•

*Fig. 6.10*

> Hip abductor moment arm varies with hip structure. In a hip with coxa valga, as indicated by

> a larger angle of inclination, the hip abductor force is more vertically aligned and has a smaller moment

> arm (D). In a hip with coxa vara, as indicated by a smaller angle of inclination, the moment arm is larger.

> Because of the smaller moment arm in the hip with coxa valga, the hip abductor muscle force will need to

> be higher to generate the same moment and will likely contribute to a higher joint contact force than in a

> hip with coxa vara. (From Neumann DA:

> Kinesiology of the musculoskeletal system

> Elsevier.)

do not generate an adequate moment to counterbalance the external adduction moment, the pelvis will rotate such that the side
farthest from the stance leg will be lower than the side closest to
the stance leg. Most commonly, this is called contralateral pelvic
drop, or simply pelvic drop, and is the motion noted during Trendelenburg gait. If the hip abductor muscles generate an internal
moment equal to the external moment, the individual remains in
static equilibrium with the pelvis level.
The hip abductor muscle force necessary to generate this
moment is dependent on the moment arm for the muscles. The
smaller the muscle moment arm, the larger the force needed to
generate the same moment. For example, in a hip with coxa valga,
the moment arm for the hip abductors is often smaller than in
one with coxa vara; thus the hip abductors will need more force
to generate the same moment (
Fig. 6.10
). As much of the force
experienced by the hip joint is due to muscle force, a hip with coxa
valga will likely experience a higher joint contact force than a hip
with coxa vara.
Taking this one step further, coxa valga commonly co-occurs
with acetabular dysplasia, which is reduced coverage from
the acetabulum over the femoral head. The reduced coverage
decreases the area of the acetabulum in contact with the femoral head. As
stress
is force divided by contact area, a hip with
coxa valga and acetabular dysplasia could experience increased
stress because of the increased muscle force needed to generate

> C: POSITIVE

> 1. Decreased bending

> moment arm (l

> ″

> )

> decreases bending

> moment (ACF

> ×

> l

> ″

> );

> OF

> decreases shear force

> across femoral neck.

> I˝

> 2. Increased functional

> length of hip abductor

> muscle.

> COXA VALGA

> = 125°

> (150°)

> D: NEGATIVE

> 1. Decreased moment

> arm (D

> ″

> ) for hip

> abductor force.

> 2. Alignment may favor

> D

> ˝

> joint dislocation.

> , ed 2, 2010, Mosby,

the internal moment and the reduced contact area over which
that force is dispersed. To reduce this stress, individuals may lean
their trunk toward the stance leg farther than typical. During
gait, this is sometimes referred to as
compensated Trendelenburg.
This lateral trunk motion moves the center of mass closer to the
hip joint axis, reducing the external moment arm and thereby
the external moment. The internal moment that the hip needs to
generate is now smaller, and therefore the muscle force is smaller.
This modification reduces the joint contact force and thereby
joint stress.

### Dynamics

Dynamics is the study of forces accelerating a body. This occurs
when unbalanced forces or moments are acting on a rigid body;
the body is under a nonequilibrium, or dynamic, condition,
resulting in motion. Based on Newton’s Second Law, the acceleration of the body will be proportional to the ratio between the
force and the mass. Whereas the sum of forces and of moments
was equal to zero in the static condition, these are now equal to
the mass multiplied by acceleration for forces and the moment of
inertia multiplied by the angular acceleration for moments. Specifically, based on Newton’s Second Law:

> M

> F

> GRF

> m

> * g

> M

> F

> m

> *g

> M

> F

> F

> M

•

*Fig. 6.11*

> Inverse dynamics calculation of joint forces and moments. Applying Newton’s Second Law, the

> three-dimensional forces and moments acting at the proximal joint can be calculated for each segment

> using the segment mass and inertial properties, segment motion, and the forces and moments acting at

> the distal end of the segment. The forces and moments acting at the distal end of the segment are either

> ground reaction force (for the most distal segment, often the foot) or joint forces and moments at the distal

> segment (for all other segments). By Newton’s Third Law, the forces and moments acting at the proximal

> joint of a segment are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the forces and moments, respec-

> tively, acting at the distal joint of the proximal segment. Thus inverse dynamics calculations begin at the

> most distal segment by solving for the proximal joint forces and moments, and then to the next proximal

> segment, and so on.

=
m

F
a
=
I

M

where
Σ
F
is the sum of forces in each of three orthogonal directions,
Σ
M
is the sum of moments about each of the three orthogonal axes,
m
is the mass of the body,
a
is the linear acceleration
of the body,
I
is the moment of inertia of the body, and
α
is the
angular acceleration of the body. Newton’s Second Law makes it
possible to calculate the forces acting on the musculoskeletal system from measurements of segment motion and mass. During
normal ambulation, vertical and medial GRF components balance the body weight and lateral inertial force. Using a process
called
inverse dynamics
, the joint forces and moments at the proximal joint of each segment can be calculated using the segment
mass and inertial properties, segment motion, and either GRF
(for the most distal segment, often the foot or forefoot) or joint
forces and moments at the distal segment (for all other segments)
(
Fig. 6.11
). To conceptualize how the GRF results in knee joint
loading, we can observe that the vertical GRF component generally passes lateral to the body’s center of mass during gait (
Fig.
6.12A
). The resultant GRF (combined medial and vertical) passes
medial to the knee joint center, creating an external knee adduction moment and resulting in a load imbalance in the medial and

> a

> = m

> *

> F

∑

> a

> F

> +

> GRF

> *

> = m

> a

> F

> +

> GRF

> *

> = m

> a

> F

> +

> GRF

> m

> * g

> + m

> *

> =

> M

> = I

> *

∑

> Solve for unknowns (

> F

> , M

> )

> a

> F

> = m

> *

∑

> a

> F

> +

> F

> *

> = m

> a

> F

> +

> F

> *

> = m

> a

> F

> +

> F

> m

> * g

> + m

> *

> =

> M

> = I

> *

∑

> Solve for unknowns (

> F

> , M

> )

> EXTERNAL DEMAND

> Gravitational and

> inertial forces

> Inertial

> force

> Lever arm (LA)

> Medial

> Vertical ground

> shear force

> reaction force

A
•

*Fig. 6.12*

> Schematic of a person in single limb support during gait. (A) External demand. The body weight

> and vertical ground reaction force (GRF) force couple tend to rotate the body clockwise. The medial shear

> GRF and the corresponding lateral inertial force produce a force couple that tends to rotate the body coun-

> terclockwise. Thus the body is in dynamic equilibrium. (B) Internal response. The resultant GRF passes

> medial to the knee joint, creating an external knee adduction moment. The external moment is balanced

> internally in the knee by creating a larger force on the medial tibial plateau (M) than on the lateral tibial

> plateau (L). Once again, the knee is in dynamic equilibrium.

lateral compartments of the knee; the medial compartment carries
more load than the lateral compartment (
Fig. 6.12B
). The higher
load in the medial side may contribute to the higher degree of OA,
which typically develops in the medial compartment. Medial tibiofemoral OA is the most common form of OA, and it is apparent
that knee OA is, at least partially, mechanically driven. Research
scientists have implicated the external knee adduction moment in
the progression of radiographic OA
; they identify this measure as a marker of disease severity.

## Joint Mechanics

Diarthrodial joints connect long bones to allow force transmission
and joint rotation. The type of joint articulating motion depends
on the shape of the joint surfaces. For example, the hip is modeled
as a ball-and-socket joint, the elbow as a hinge joint, the knee and
proximal interphalangeal joint as bicondylar joints, and the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb as a saddle joint. In general, the
joint articulating motion can be described in terms of spinning,
rolling, and sliding or gliding (
Fig. 6.13
). This relative motion
between the articular surfaces is often referred to as
arthrokinematics
, whereas the physiologic motion observed (e.g., flexion/extension) is referred to as
osteokinematics.
Spinning and sliding/gliding
motions involve the relative translation of one articulating surface
against the other. Rolling has the least relative motion between
articulating surfaces.
There are general expectations for the interaction between
arthrokinematic motion and the osteokinematic motion. For
example, at the hip, where the convex femoral head articulates
with the concave acetabulum, the osteokinematic motion of hip
flexion would typically be accompanied by the arthrokinematic motion of the femoral head rolling anteriorly and gliding

> INTERNAL RESPONSE

> Center

> of mass

> M

> L

> External

> adduction

> moment

> Ground reaction force

B

posteriorly on the acetabulum to maintain a stationary axis of
rotation within the acetabulum. However, these arthrokinematic
movements are not automatic; instead, they need to be facilitated by forces from active and passive tissues including muscles
and joint structures. Alterations in arthrokinematics can lead to
less precise movement, altered axes of rotation, and potentially
joint injury.
Although diarthrodial joints experience a substantial amount
of loading and motion, the cartilage surfaces typically undergo little or no damage during normal conditions because of the special
lubrication qualities of synovial fluid and the biphasic structure
of the cartilage. Synovial fluid, which is secreted by the synovium
into the joint space, contains mainly hyaluronate. Biomechanically, hyaluronate is a highly viscous liquid, with the shear stress
depending on the rate of shear strain applied. As the shear rate
increases, the viscosity of synovial fluid decreases. However, this
system may be diminished in the presence of pathology. For example, in rheumatoid arthritis, because of enzymatic degradation of
the hyaluronate molecules, the viscosity of the rheumatoid synovial fluid does not have a normal shear rate dependency and is
believed to be less effective in lubrication.

## Joint Constraint and Stability

All joints, in theory, have six degrees of freedom; that is, they
can translate along and rotate about three independent axes. The
actual amount of motion available for each of those degrees of
freedom depends on the anatomic structures of the particular
joint. As form follows function, it could also be said that the
mobility and stability of a joint depends on how it is used. A
common example is the difference between the shoulder joint
(specifically the glenohumeral joint) and the hip joint. Both are

> Spinning

> Rolling

> Sliding

•

*Fig. 6.13*

> The motions of joint articulation: spinning, rolling, and sliding. (From Morrey BF, Itoi E, An KN:

> Biomechanics of the shoulder. In Rockwood CA, Matsen, F, editors:

> WB Saunders, pp 233-276, 1998.)

ball-and-socket joints, but the shoulder has far more mobility to
move the arm around in space while the hip is far more stable
to support the weight and motion of the body during functional
tasks such as walking.
Because of the variations in anatomic structures of the joints,
various limbs have different movement characteristics and load
transmissions. Adequate joint stability that balances motion and
loads is necessary for a joint to function properly. Chronic disease
or traumatic injury may cause damage to joint tissue, thus compromising the constraints and stability of the joint. To improve
the diagnosis and treatment of such joint disorders, it is essential
to understand the basic joint constraint mechanics that provide
stability. The anatomic structures responsible for joint constraint
can be divided into passive and active elements. Passive elements,
consisting of the capsulo-ligamentous structures and bony articulating surfaces, provide static constraints of the joint. The active
elements include muscle-tendon units, which provide dynamic
constraints of the joint.
The contribution of capsulo-ligamentous structures to joint
stability and constraint are determined by the change in length,
the line of action, and the tissue material properties (
Fig. 6.14
).
For a given loading and displacement of the joint, the greater the
elongation of the soft tissue (i.e., stretch), the higher the passive
tension generated by that tissue. Intra-articular joint effusion
can also stretch the capsulo-ligamentous structures, increasing

> The shoulder

> , ed 2, vol 1, Philadelphia,

the passive tension in the tissue. The specific contribution of
such passive tension to joint constraint further depends on the
relative line of action of the capsulo-ligament structures. Therefore the relative locations of the origins and insertions of the
ligaments in any given joint position may determine the contribution of the ligamentous tension in resisting joint displacement
in three orthogonal directions. Surgical alterations of the soft
tissue attachment to the bone would therefore change the joint
constraints.
Lengthening and shortening of the capsulo-ligament structures during joint loading and movement determine the tissue
deformation. The tissue material properties, along with the
amount of deformation, will determine the structure passive tension. For the same amount of deformation, the stiffer the tissue
is, the higher the tension will be; likewise, the more compliant
the tissue is, the lower the tension will be. Alterations of the
material properties due to physiologic and pathologic conditions
definitely alter the joint constraint and the articulation. For
example, the tight posterior capsule of a baseball pitcher limits
the range of physiologic motion. On the other hand, the relaxation of capsulo-ligamentous structures during pregnancy and
in people with rheumatologic diseases could potentially lead to
abnormal motion and contact stress on the joint surface. These
alterations of soft tissue material properties must be considered
as potentially critical factors in initiating early joint cartilage

•

*Fig. 6.14*

> When the joint is loaded or displaced, the capsulo-ligamentous

> tissues are stretched, and the passive tensions develop. The amount of

> tension developed depends on the amount of deformation and the mate-

> rial properties of the soft tissue. The location of the capsulo-ligamentous

> attachment on the bone and the direction of bony movement regulate not

> only the amount of deformation but also the direction of passive tension

> in stabilizing the joint.

degeneration and may lead to the vicious cycle that perpetuates
arthritis.
Experimentally, researchers have assessed the significance of
various passive anatomic structures to joint stability by using
two methods: the
stiffness test
and the
laxity test.
Stiffness, in the
most general sense, is resistance to deformation. The stiffness
test is commonly used to determine the relative contributions
of individual anatomic elements to joint constraint. The laxity
test demonstrates the outcome of joint instability when one or
more constraining units are compromised. In the stiffness test,
the joint is displaced under controlled testing conditions and the
corresponding load is monitored. Based on the joint load–displacement curves, it is obvious that the load required to displace
the joint is higher when all the ligaments are intact than when
a ligament is lacerated. The difference in the constraining load
between these two curves at the same joint displacement represents the contribution of that particular sectioned ligament to
the joint constraint. Because the capsulo-ligamentous structures
are passive tissues, as long as the joint displacement is controlled
and experimentally reproduced, the relative contributions of
individual tissues will not be dependent on the order in which
the soft tissue is removed. Contrary to the stiffness test, during
which displacement is varied and load is measured, in the laxity test a specific load is applied to the joint and the extent of
joint displacement is measured. Joint laxity is documented with
changes in displacement as anatomic elements are removed. The
joint laxity as observed and measured provides more of a clinical
scenario of the joint instability experienced by a patient who has
sustained a similar soft tissue injury; however, it fails to capture
the role of muscle in providing additional stability.
In addition to soft tissue constraints, the joint articulating surface is an element that provides joint constraint and stability. Theoretically, its significance to joint stability is determined by both the
geometric shapes of the joint surfaces and the amount of compressive force encountered between those two surfaces (
Fig. 6.15A
).
When two curved surfaces articulate, a vertically applied force will
induce either a transverse displacement or a transverse constraining
force. The greater the congruency between the curved articulating
surfaces, the greater the induced horizontal joint constraint force.
This mechanism is sometimes referred to as
concavity-compression.
In the shoulder joint, for example, the relative translations between
the glenoid and humeral head and the forces resisting translation
were recorded. The stability ratio, defined as the peak translational force divided by the applied compressive force, was higher
in the hanging-arm position than in glenohumeral abduction (
Fig.
6.15A
). The highest stability ratio was detected in the inferior and
superior directions, and the anterior direction was associated with

> +

> +

> F

> F

> +

> F

> θ

A

> With labrum

> Without labrum

> Superior

> Posterosuperior

> Anterosuperior

> 60%

> 40%

> 20%

> Anterior

> Posterior

> Anteroinferior

> Posteroinferior

> Inferior

B
•

*Fig. 6.15*

> Contributions of the articulating surface to joint stability. (A)

> Transverse displacement of bone in the curved joint requires elevation

> against the articulating surfaces. With compressive FV applied, any trans-

> verse movement will encounter a resistance (FH). If either the mating joint

> surface is flat (i.e.,

> θ

> = 0) or a compressive force FV is not available, there

> will be no transverse constraint (FH = 0). (B) The stability ratio, defined as

> transverse constraint force FH divided by the applied compressive force FV,

> was measured in the glenohumeral joint with the labrum intact or absent.

> This measure indicates the stability through the joint–surface interaction,

> independent of the magnitude of the compressive force applied.

the lowest stability ratio. Resection of the glenoid labrum resulted
in an average decrease in the stability ratio of 10%. In the treatment
of traumatic recurrent anterior shoulder instability, patients with a
large osseous glenoid defect are at risk for recurrent instability after
arthroscopic Bankart repair. Bone grafting performed in shoulders
with a large osseous glenoid defect to restore the articulating surface
provides excellent clinical outcomes.
To benefit from the concavity-compression joint constraint,
a compressive or oppositional force across the joint surface is
required. This joint compressive force is usually generated by muscle contraction. The relative location and direction of the resultant
joint force to the available articulating surfaces will determine the

> 0

> 0

> –

> +

> –

> +

•

*Fig. 6.16*

> Effect of negative intra-articular pressure on shoulder joint stability. In a normal situation, trac-

> tion on the arm causes an increase in negative intra-articular pressure, and joint distraction is constrained.

> On the contrary, if the capsule is vented and air or fluid is introduced into the joint, traction on the arm no

> longer affects the intra-articular pressure; instead, the joint will be subluxed inferiorly.

> 20

> 60

> 80

> 120

> 180

A
B
•

*Fig. 6.17*

> Coordination of the muscle contractions to accomplish a given task is demonstrated by the

> situation when the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles work together to elevate the shoulder joint. (A) For

> patients with a rotator cuff tear, the shoulder elevation is accomplished by the deltoid muscle alone. The

> resultant joint force is directed superiorly because of the line of action of the deltoid muscle. In this situ-

> ation, the joint is not stable and superior subluxation and migration results. (B) On the other hand, when

> elevating the shoulder with the rotator cuff muscle alone, the resultant joint force points toward the center

> of the glenoid surface, which makes the joint very stable. However, the magnitude of the joint resultant

> forces are relatively high, which may not be ideal for the cartilage tissue. (C) Ideally, shoulder elevation

> is accomplished with a combination of the deltoid muscles as the prime mover to provide strength and

> power, along with the rotator cuff muscles as the sterling in directing the joint resultant force to keep the

> joint in a more stable condition.

potential stability of the joint. For example, in the glenohumeral
joint, if the resultant force is well located at the center of the glenoid articulating surface, the joint is considered stable. When the
resultant force is directed outside the available joint surfaces, joint
dislocation is most likely. However, when the resultant force is
located within the joint surfaces but more toward the rim of the
glenoid surface, the potential exists for joint subluxation. The
interaction of muscle force resulting in a resultant joint constraint
force is illustrated later.
Intra-articular or intracapsular pressure is the other component of passive and static joint constraint (
Fig. 6.16
). The joint
is usually surrounded by a capsule and sealed with synovial tissue. When the capsule is intact, any distraction force stretches
and deforms the capsulo-ligamentous structure and will generate
negative intra-articular pressure. This negative intra-articular pressure will counteract further displacement. When the joint capsule
is compromised, either by deterioration, injury, or surgery, such
negative pressure can no longer develop and cannot constrain the
joint. Negative intracapsular pressure is, therefore, a constraint of

> 0

> +

> +

> –

> +

> +

> 20

> 60

> 80

> 120

> 120

> 80

> 180

> 20

> 180

> 60

C

all joints and is especially important for joints under gravitational
distraction such as the shoulder joint.
Active muscle contraction is also important for joint stability. Proper coordination of muscle contraction provides dynamic
joint constraint. On the other hand, deficiency of muscle innervation or a tendon defect can result in unfavorable joint constraint and lead to joint instability. Importantly, muscle force
can act as either a joint stabilizer or a joint dislocator. The contribution of muscles to joint constraint is similar to that of passive capsulo-ligamentous tension. It is determined by the line of
action of the passive and active tension of the muscle. Based on
the relative position of the bony structure and the direction of the
joint displacement, the same muscle-tendon structure can contribute differently to joint constraint. When the joint is spanned
by multiple muscles, the coordination of muscle contraction will
ultimately determine the dynamic joint stability. For example,
the contributions of muscle contractions to the articulating surfaces of the shoulder can be described in terms of the normal
and shear directions (
Fig. 6.17
). The shear component has direct

influence on the transverse translation of the bony element at
the joint. In contrast, the normal force component of the muscle
provides the compressive force to bring the surfaces together. A
glenohumeral joint with a lax capsule and loose ligaments might
be dynamically stabilized if the glenoid concavity is maintained
and the functions of the external and internal rotators, which
are efficient stabilizers, are enhanced. On the other hand, in
a patient with a rotator cuff tear, the pull of the major movers, such as deltoids during arm elevation or forward rotation,
will result in a resultant joint force in the superior and anterior
directions; this could result in superior impingement or anterior
instability.
In general, muscle contraction will generate moments about
all three axes of rotation for a given joint. However, when the
constraints from other periarticular soft tissues are not available,
the muscle will also be responsible for maintaining stability during the joint’s rotation. If a muscle crosses multiple joints, the
effect of muscle activation depends on the moment arms of all
the joints it spans. The concept of biarticular muscle is of clinical
importance. For example, when considering rehabilitation after
reconstructive surgery of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL),
the goal is to strengthen the muscles without excessive tension
being placed on the ligament. Quadriceps loading, especially
with the knee in a near extended position, would result in an
anterior joint shear force and anterior displacement of the tibia
with respect to the femur. It has been suggested that this shear
force would induce tension in the ACL, driving investigators
to recommend closed kinetic-chain exercises. During closed
kinetic-chain exercises, such as the squat and the leg press, the
foot is fixed and knee motion is accompanied by motion at the
hip and ankle joints. The GRF causes external flexion moments
at both the knee and hip joints. The antagonistic muscle action
of hamstrings at the knee joint is recruited to balance the hip
flexion moment. Cocontraction of quadriceps and hamstrings
at the knee joint reduces the anterior joint shear force and the
tension in the ACL
but can increase the compressive load as
well. More recently, the avoidance of open kinetic-chain exercises following ACL reconstruction has been called into question, with ACL strain during walking being higher than during
open kinetic-chain exercises.

## Mechanical Loading on Tendon

Tendons transmit muscle contraction force to bone to cause movement. The force transmitted is primarily tensile force. Tendons
are composed primarily of water along with collagen, elastin, and
proteoglycans. At rest, the collagen fibers have a crimped appearance, and initial loading on the tendon straightens the crimped
collagen fibrils. As further load is applied, the straightened fibers
are lengthened. This lengthening requires greater load than the
straightening phase, thus tendons are considered to be “nonlinearly elastic.” Specific portions of tendons also experience compression and shear force. Compression can occur when the tendon
path is altered around a bony structure. As a tendon is subjected
to compression in a specific area, the mechanical loading does
not distribute evenly within the tendon, which can result in shear
force inside the tendon. The contact surfaces of the tendon can
also experience shear force as the tendon glides against surrounding tissues.
Loading on the tendon has been measured through both
direct and noninvasive methods.
Direct measurement of tendon
loading can be achieved using implanted sensors, such as strain
gauges.
While this approach provides a direct measurement of
loading, it is not designed for long-term use and has limited clinical utility due to the need for surgical implantation. Radiographic
measurement of implanted tantalum beads (e.g., through plain
radiography, dual-plane fluoroscopy, or computed tomography
scanning) has also been used to measure mechanical properties of
tendon in vivo. Shear wave elastography,
a technique that uses
ultrasound, can be used to measure the elasticity of tendon through
noninvasive means. Shear wave tensiometry
is another method
to estimate tendon loading noninvasively. It uses accelerometers
and a small “tapping device” to measure wave propagation along
the tendon and has been shown to be reliable during different isometric contractions.
Tendon length measurements
are also of
interest as they are used in musculoskeletal models to help define
moment arm lengths. Tendons respond differently to active versus
passive loading. In a rehabilitation context, this could apply to
active versus passive treatments, where the patient actively moves
the knee through muscle contraction, putting load on the patellar
tendon versus manual manipulation, where a physical therapist
moves the knee through a specific range of motion, resulting in
different load on the tendon despite similar joint angles. Some of
these measurement methods may be more suited to capture active
or passive loading and thus should be chosen accordingly to suit
the situation at hand.
The three modes of mechanical loading (namely, tension,
compression, and shear/gliding) can be demonstrated by three
scenarios at the shoulder joint (
Fig. 6.18
). The short head of
the biceps brachii tendon is an example of the first scenario,
in which the tendon mainly experiences tension alone. The
second scenario, in which the tendon encounters tension and
compression together, occurs internally at the bone insertion site
of the supraspinatus tendon. The insertional area of the tendon
encounters tensile force and compression resulting from the
transverse contact of the tendon with the attached bone. The
third scenario occurs when the tendon is simultaneously subjected to tension, compression, and gliding. The long head of
the biceps brachii tendon, where it passes through the bicipital groove, demonstrates an example of the third scenario. The
supraspinatus tendon also fits the scenario and the second scenario. Subacromial impingement of the supraspinatus tendon
generates high compressive stress that varies along the supraspinatus tendon, depending on humeroscapular elevation. The
mode of mechanical tendon loading is potentially correlated to
the incidence of tendon degeneration. The tendons in the first
scenario rarely experience degenerative tendinopathy. Tendons
commonly affected with tendinopathy are represented in the
other two scenarios, in which the affected areas normally sustain
compression and shear force with or without gliding in addition
to tensile force.

## Mechanical Loading on Bursae

Bursae are fluid-filled sacs that act to reduce friction between bone
and surrounding soft tissues (e.g., muscles, tendon, skin). Loading
applied to the bursae is primarily compressive and/or shear force.
Compression occurs when surrounding tissues press on the bursae
and shear occurs when surrounding tissues slide past the bursae.
Inflammation of a bursa (i.e., bursitis) can cause increased fluid
within the bursa and thus increased pressure in the bursa, which
can limit joint motion. Chronic bursitis can cause further swelling

> Supraspinatus

> tendon

> T

> P

> Scenario 2

> Long head

> biceps tendon

> T

> P

> Scenario 3

•

*Fig. 6.18*

> Supraspinatus tendon and long head and short head biceps tendons. Scenario 1: tension (T)

> only (in the short head of the biceps brachii tendon). Scenario 2: tension and compression (P) (in the bone

> insertion site of the supraspinatus tendon). Scenario 3: tension, compression, and gliding (in the long head

> of the biceps brachii tendon, where it passes through the bicipital groove).

and thickening of the bursa, sometimes without associated further increases in pain. While bursitis can be crystal induced (e.g.,
gouty bursitis, tophaceous gout) or induced by inflammatory
arthritis (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthritis), it can also
be caused by prolonged loading or overuse.
Limited measurement of loading on bursae exists in the literature; however, retrocalcaneal bursa pressure has been measured
with the use of a commercially available blood pressure measurement system.
Despite the lack of bursae loading measurements, a general understanding of loading on the bursae is
important in clinical applications such as greater trochanter pain
syndrome. The etiology of this condition can be multifactorial,
including trochanteric bursitis and/or tendinopathy of the gluteus medius or minimus tendons, or conditions affecting the
back, core musculature, or contralateral limb. Patients often have
pain during hip extension and lying on the affected side, which
load the bursa. Conditions causing abnormal gait may also put
increased load on the bursa. Thus rehabilitation and treatment
should reduce or avoid these postures and movements that compress the bursa. Where possible, joint protection (e.g., kneeling
pads for bursitis of the knee) can be used to reduce load on the
bursae.

## Conclusion

Biomechanics is a powerful tool for understanding musculoskeletal function and the forces necessary to produce and control movement. Knowledge of biomechanical principles can help
explain many commonly encountered situations in the musculoskeletal system, provide insight into mechanisms of injury, and
inform intervention programs.

> Short head

> biceps tendon

> Scenario 1

The references for this chapter can also be found on Elsevier
eBooks+.

## References

> 1.	 Borelli, G. A. (1685).

> De motu animalium

> . Lugduni.

> 2.	 Newton I, Sir, 1642-1727:

> Newton’s principia: the mathematical

> principles of natural philosophy

> . 1846. Published by Daniel Adee,

> [c1846].

> 3.	 Lewis CL, Laudicina NM, Khuu A, Loverro KL: The human pelvis:

> variation in structure and function during gait,

> Anat Rec (Hoboken,

> N.J.: 2007)

> 300(4):633–642, 2017.

> 4.	 Cappozzo A, Catani F, Della Croce U, Leardini A: Position and

> orientation in space of bones during movement: anatomical frame

> definition and determination,

> Clin BioMech

> 10(4):171–178,

> 1995.

> 5.	 Inman VT, Lieberman JC, Ralston HJ, Todd F:

> Human walking

> ,

> Williams & Wilkins, 1981.

> 6.	 Kadaba MP, Ramakrishnan HK, Wootten ME: Measurement

> of lower extremity kinematics during level walking,

> J Orthop Res

> 8(0736–0266; 3):383–392, 1990.

> 7.	 Kaufman KR, Hughes C, Morrey BF, Morrey M, An K: Gait char-

> acteristics of patients with knee osteoarthritis,

> J Biomech

> 34(7):907–

> 915, 2001.

> 8.	 Perry J:

> Gait analysis: normal and pathological function

> , SLACK

> Incorporated, 1992.

> 9.	 Sutherland DH, Olshen R, Cooper L, Woo SL: The development

> of mature gait,

> Jbjs

> 62(3):e12995, 1980.

> https://journals.lww.com/

> jbjsjournal/Fulltext/1980/62030/The_development_of_mature_

> gait_.4.aspx

> .

> 10.	 Grood ES, Suntay WJ: A joint coordinate system for the clinical

> description of three-dimensional motions: application to the knee,

> J

> Biomech Eng

> 105(2):136–144, 1983.

> 11.	 Wu G, Cavanagh PR: ISB recommendations for standardization

> in the reporting of kinematic data,

> J Biomech

> 28(10):1257–1261,

> 1995.

> 12.	 Cappozzo A, Cappello A, Della Croce U, Pensalfini F: Surface-

> marker cluster design criteria for 3-D bone movement reconstruc-

> tion,

> IEEE Trans Biomed Eng

> 44(12):1165–1174, 1997.

> 12.	 Leboeuf F, Sangeux M: Wand-mounted lateral markers are less

> prone to misplacement and soft-tissue artefacts than skin-mounted

> markers when using the conventional gait model,

> Gait Posture

> 100:243–246, 2023.

> 13.	 Selvik G, Alberius P, Aronson AS: A roentgen stereophotogrammet-

> ric system. Construction, calibration and technical accuracy,

> Acta

> Radiol Diagn

> 24(4):343–352, 1983.

> 14.	 Selvik G: Roentgen stereophotogrammetry. A method for the study

> of the kinematics of the skeletal system,

> Acta Orthop Scand Suppl

> 232:1–51, 1989.

> 15.	 Kapron AL, Aoki SK, Peters CL, et al.: Accuracy and feasibility of

> dual fluoroscopy and model-based tracking to quantify in vivo hip

> kinematics during clinical exams,

> J Appl Biomech

> 30(3):461–470,

> 2014.

> 16.	 Li G, Wuerz TH, DeFrate LE: Feasibility of using orthogonal fluo-

> roscopic images to measure in vivo joint kinematics,

> J Biomech Eng

> 126(2):313–318, 2004.

> 17.	 Tashman S, Anderst W: In-vivo measurement of dynamic joint

> motion using high speed biplane radiography and CT: application

> to canine ACL deficiency,

> J Biomech Eng

> 125(2):238–245, 2003.

> 18.	 Kinzel GL, Hall ASJ, Hillberry BM: Measurement of the total

> motion between two body segments. I. Analytical development,

> Biomech

> 5(1):93–105, 1972.

> 19.	 Spoor CW, Veldpaus FE: Rigid body motion calculated from spatial

> co-ordinates of markers,

> J Biomech

> 13(4):391–393, 1980.

> 20.	 Wade L, Needham L, McGuigan P, Bilzon J: Applications and limi-

> tations of current markerless motion capture methods for clinical

> gait biomechanics,

> PeerJ

> 10:e12995, 2022.

> 21.	 Horenstein RE, Goudeau YR, Lewis CL, Shefelbine SJ: Using

> magneto-inertial measurement units to pervasively measure hip

> joint motion during sports,

> Sensors

> 20:4970, 2020.

> 22.	 Kobsar D, Masood Z, Khan H, et al.: Wearable inertial sensors for

> gait analysis in adults with osteoarthritis-A scoping review,

> Sensors

> (Basel, Switzerland)

> 20(24):7143, 2020.

> 23.	 Rose MJ, Costello KE, Eigenbrot S, Torabian K, Kumar D: Inertial

> measurement units and application for remote health care in hip

> and knee osteoarthritis: narrative review,

> JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol

> 9(2):e33521, 2022.

> 24.	 Costello KE, Eigenbrot S, Geronimo A, et al.: Quantifying varus

> thrust in knee osteoarthritis using wearable inertial sensors: a proof

> of concept,

> Clin BioMech

> 80:105232, 2020.

> 25.	 Tong K, Granat MH: A practical gait analysis system using gyro-

> scopes,

> Med Eng Phys

> 21(2):87–94, 1999.

> 26.	 Bonnet S, Heliot R: A magnetometer-based approach for study-

> ing human movements,

> IEEE Trans Biomed Eng

> 54(7):1353–1355,

> 2007.

> 27.	 Solomon DH, Rudin RS: Digital health technologies: opportunities

> and challenges in rheumatology,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 16(9):525–535,

> 2020.

> 28.	 Bergmann G, Graichen F, Rohlmann A: Hip joint loading dur-

> ing walking and running, measured in two patients,

> J Biomech

> 26(8):969–990, 1993.

> 29.	 Lewis CL, Sahrmann SA, Moran DW: Effect of hip angle on ante-

> rior hip joint force during gait,

> Gait Posture

> 32(4):603–607, 2010.

> 30.	 Winter DA:

> Biomechanics and motor control of human movement

> John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1990.

> 31.	 Hatfield GL, Stanish WD, Hubley-Kozey CL: Three-dimensional

> biomechanical gait characteristics at baseline are associated with pro-

> gression to total knee arthroplasty,

> Arthritis Care Res

> 67(7):1004–

> 1014, 2015.

> 32.	 Bennell KL, Bowles Kelly-A, Wang Y, Cicuttini F, Davies-Tuck M,

> Hinman RS: Higher dynamic medial knee load predicts greater car-

> tilage loss over 12 months in medial knee osteoarthritis,

> Ann Rheum

> Dis

> 70(10):1770–1774, 2011.

> 33.	 Mundermann A, Dyrby CO, Andriacchi TP: Secondary gait changes

> in patients with medial compartment knee osteoarthritis: increased

> load at the ankle, knee, and hip during walking,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 52(9):2835–2844, 2005.

> 34.	 Sharma L, Hurwitz DE, Thonar EJ, et al.: Knee adduction moment,

> serum hyaluronan level, and disease severity in medial tibiofemoral

> osteoarthritis,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 41(7):1233–1240, 1998.

> 35.	 Mow VC, Flatow EL, Foster RJ: Biomechanics. In Simon SR, edi-

> tor:

> Orthopaedi basic science

> , American Academy of Orthopaedic

> Surgeons, 1994, pp 397–446.

> 36.	 Halder AM, Kuhl SG, Zobitz ME, Larson D, An KN: Effects of

> the glenoid labrum and glenohumeral abduction on stability of the

> shoulder joint through concavity-compression: an in vitro study,

> J

> Bone Jt Surg

> 83(7):1062–1069, 2001. American Volume.

> 37.	 Lutz GE, Palmitier RA, An KN, Chao EY: Comparison of tibio-

> femoral joint forces during open-kinetic-chain and closed-kinetic-

> chain exercises,

> J Bone Jt Surg

> 75(5):732–739, 1993. American

> Volume.

> 38.	 Englander ZA, Garrett WE, Spritzer CE, DeFrate LE: In  vivo

> J

> attachment site to attachment site length and strain of the ACL and

> its bundles during the full gait cycle measured by MRI and high-

> speed biplanar radiography,

> J Biomech

> 98:109443, 2020.

> 39.	 Fleming BC, Oksendahl H, Beynnon BD: Open- or closed-kinetic

> chain exercises after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction?

> Exerc

> Sport Sci Rev

> 33(3):134–140, 2005.

> 40.	 Noehren B, Snyder-Mackler L: Who’s afraid of the big bad wolf?

> Open-chain exercises after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction,

> J Orthop Sports Phys Ther

> 50(9):473–475, 2020.

> 41.	 Bey MJ, Derwin KA: Measurement of in vivo tendon function,

> J

> Shoulder Elbow Surg

> 21(2):149–157, 2012.

> 42.	 Stephens PR, Nunamaker DM, Butterweck DM: Application of a

> Hall-effect transducer for measurement of tendon strains in horses,

> Am J Vet Res

> 50(7):1089–1095, 1989.

> 43.	 Peltz CD, Haladik JA, Divine G, Siegal D, van Holsbeeck M, Bey

> MJ: ShearWave elastography: repeatability for measurement of ten-

> don stiffness,

> Skeletal Radiol

> 42(8):1151–1156, 2013.

> 44.	 Ryu J, Jeong WK: Current status of musculoskeletal application of

> shear wave elastography,

> Ultrasonography (Seoul, Korea)

> 36(3):185–

> 197, 2017.

> 45.	 Martin JA, Brandon SCE, Keuler EM, et al.: Gauging force by tap-

> ping tendons,

> Nat Commun

> 9(1):1592, 2018.

> 46.	 Schneebeli A, Falla D, Cescon C, Barbero M: Measurement of

> Achilles tendon loading using shear wave tensiometry: a reliability

> study,

> Musculoskelet Sci Pract

> 62:102665, 2022.

> 47.	 Tsaopoulos DE, Baltzopoulos V, Maganaris CN: Human patel-

> lar tendon moment arm length: measurement considerations and

> clinical implications for joint loading assessment,

> Clin BioMech

> 21(7):657–667, 2006.

> 48.	 Lohrer H, Raabe T, Nauck T, Arentz S: Minimally invasive retrocal-

> caneal bursa pressure measurement: development and pilot applica-

> tion,

> Arch Orthop Trauma Surg

> 131(5):719–723, 2011.

> 49.	 Lohrer H, Nauck T: Retrocalcaneal bursitis but not Achilles tendi-

> nopathy is characterized by increased pressure in the retrocalcaneal

> ,

> bursa,

> Clin BioMech

> 29(3):283–288, 2014.
