# B Cells

IZUMI KURATA-SATO, YONG-RUI ZOU,
CHRISTINE GRIMALDI, AND BETTY DIAMOND

KEY POINTS

> Immunoglobulins (Igs) serve as both an antigen receptor on B cells

> and a major secreted product involved in antigen neutralization.

> The variable region of Igs binds antigen and is generated by

> random rearrangement of gene segments to give rise to numerous

> specificities. The constant region (Fc) defines the isotype of Igs and

> mediates effector functions.

> Surface Igs regulate B cell selection, survival, and activation. B cells are

> generated in the bone marrow and develop into immunocompetent,

> naïve B cells that reside in peripheral lymphoid organs.

> Follicular B cells respond to protein antigens in a T cell–dependent

> fashion and are the major source of memory B cells and long-lived

> plasma cells. B1 and marginal zone B cells are independent of

> cognate T cell help and develop into short-lived plasma cells. IgM

> autoantibodies present in all individuals remove apoptotic debris in a

> nonimmunogenic fashion.

> Autoreactive B cells are censored during B cell development. Failure

> censoring in autoimmune-prone individuals leads to autoantibody

> production.

## Introduction

The immune system is composed of numerous cells that are
required to generate innate and adaptive immune responses.
Adaptive responses are characterized by immunologic memory
generated during the first exposure to an antigen, thereby permitting a rapid response to the antigen after subsequent exposure.
B cells are lymphocytes that recognize antigens through a
molecule called the B cell receptor (BCR). The BCR is a surface
immunoglobulin (Ig) molecule that is associated with additional
proteins that transduce a signal upon antigen binding. Upon
encountering its antigen, a B cell begins a process of activation
that leads to antibody secretion and memory formation regulated
by interplay with antigen-activated T cells, dendritic cells (DCs),
soluble factors, and in some cases follicular dendritic cells (FDCs).
Both T and B lymphocytes can differentiate from naïve to memory cells, but only B cells have the capacity to fine-tune their
antigen receptor structure to alter specificity and increase affinity,
giving rise to more effective antibodies. Beyond immunoglobulin
secretion, B cells regulate the immune response by cytokine secretion and antigen presentation to T cells in the context of class
II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. While
much of the knowledge of B cell biology has been generated in
mouse models, human B cell biology is described in this chapter
whenever possible.

## Immunoglobulins: Structure and Function

The hallmark of a B cell is the expression of an Ig molecule. There
are two forms of Igs, membrane-bound Igs and secreted Igs, that
are generated through alternative messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing. When cell surface Ig, also termed
BCR,
is bound by antigen,
it initiates a signaling cascade that contributes to B cell tolerance
or maturation, survival, and differentiation. Secreted Igs, referred
to as
antibodies,
are produced by B cells after terminal differentiation to plasma cells to protect the host through neutralizing and
eliminating the eliciting antigen.
Structurally, Igs are composed of four polypeptide chains: two
identical light (L) chains with molecular weights of approximately
25 kDa and two identical heavy (H) chains of 50 to 65 kDa. Each
of the chains contains a folding motif that is highly conserved
among proteins of the immune system, the
Ig domain.
These
domains constitute the backbone of the Ig molecule and help permit pairing of the polypeptide chains (
Fig. 13.1
). The quaternary
structure of an Ig molecule assumes a Y-shaped conformation that
contains two functional moieties: two identical antigen-binding
regions or variable regions, which are the arms of the Y, and a
constant region, which is the base of the Y.
The definition of the functional moieties derives from early
studies analyzing proteolytic fragments of Ig molecules. Cleavage
with papain generates two identical fragments that retain antigenbinding capacity and hence are named
Fab,
as well as a distinct
crystallizable fragment, the constant region (Fc), that mediates
immune effector functions but does not interact with antigen.
The antigen-binding regions are formed by pairing of the variable domain of the L chain (VL) with the variable domain of the
H chain (VH). In contrast to the remainder of the molecule, great
diversity exists in the amino acid sequence of both the framework
regions and the variable domains, which allows for a broad repertoire of Ig molecules that can recognize a wide array of antigens.
Within the variable region of the Ig molecule are discrete regions,
known as
complementary determining regions
(CDRs), that make
direct contact with antigen. The amino acid sequences of the
CDR are highly variable; framework regions exhibit more conserved amino acid sequences. The H- and L-chain molecules each
contain three CDRs and four framework regions (see
Fig. 13.1
).
The minimal antigenic determinant recognized by the variable
regions of the H and L chains is known as an
epitope,
which may
be a continuous or discontinuous region on a protein, carbohydrate, lipid, or nucleic acid. The presence of two identical variable
regions in a single Ig molecule confers the capacity to interact with
repetitive antigenic determinants present in multivalent antigens

> F(ab´)

> FWR

> V

> V

> C

> CDR

> C

> Fab

> Hinge

> C

> Fc

> C

•

*Fig. 13.1*

> Schematic of the antibody molecule. An antibody monomer

> consists of two heavy (H)-chain molecules covalently linked to two light

> (L)-chain molecules. The variable region is composed of the V

> and V

> domains of the H and L chains, respectively. Within the V

> and V

> domains

> are four framework regions (FWRs) and three complementary-determin-

> ing regions (CDRs), which together make up the antigen-binding pocket.

> Papain digestion generates the Fab portion, which consists of VH, CH1,

> VL, and CL domains, and pepsin digestion generates two covalently linked

> Fabs, known as the

> F(ab

> ′

> )2

> . The Fc region of the H-chain constant region,

> which mediates immune effector functions, consists of the hinge domain

> (only in immunoglobulin [Ig]G, IgA, and IgD), which increases flexibility, and

> CH2 and CH3 domains.

(i.e., polysaccharides) and enhances avidity of the Ig by binding
two separate antigen molecules containing the same antigenic
determinant.
The constant region directs the Ig effector functions that mediate the killing and removal of invading organisms and both the
activation and homeostasis of the immune system. The constant
region is formed by the constant domain of the L chain (CL),
which is paired to the first constant domain of the heavy chain
(CH1), and the remaining constant domains of the two heavy
chains (CH2, CH3, and CH4 in immunoglobulin M [IgM]),
paired to each other. However, the functions associated with the
constant region are mediated by the constant domains of the H
chain only.

### Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain Constant Region

The specific binding interactions that occur between the Ig variable region and antigen may be sufficient to block microbial
infectivity or neutralize toxins. However, the ability to eliminate pathogens is mediated by the Fc portion of the molecule.
The Fc regions of antigen–antibody complexes are made accessible to serum factors that constitute the complement cascade or
to cytotoxic and phagocytic cells that mediate the destruction
and removal of pathogens. In mice and humans, there are five
different types of H-chain constant regions, or isotypes, designated IgM (
μ
), IgD (
δ
), IgG (
γ
), IgA (
α
), and IgE (
ε
)
; each
is encoded by a distinct constant region gene segment present
in the H-chain locus of chromosome 4 in humans or chromosome 12 in mice. Each isotype is capable of specific effector
functions, and each cellular receptor for Ig binds specific isotypes and initiates a distinct intra-cellular signaling cascade.
The number of CH domains, the presence of a hinge region to
increase flexibility between Fab regions, the serum half-life, the
ability to form polymers and to mediate complement activation
and Fc receptor binding vary among isotypes. Characteristics
of different Ig H-chain isotypes are presented in
Table 13.1
.
BCRs of different isotypes may also deliver different intracellular signals when activated by antigen. It should be noted
that the interplay between antibodies and the cells that bear
the Fc receptors extends beyond pathogen clearance and shapes
the immune response by mediating activation or inhibition of
specific cell types
and by mediating cell death.
Immunoglobulin M
IgM is the first isotype expressed in developing B cells and the first
antibody secreted during a primary immune response. It is found
predominantly in serum but is also present in mucosal secretions
and breast milk. Because the process that increases antibody affinity for a particular antigen (affinity maturation) has not yet been
initiated during the early stages of a primary immune response,
IgM antibodies usually exhibit low affinity. Their low affinity is
balanced by the fact that much of the secreted IgM that exists is
in pentameric form, generating multiple binding sites, providing
high avidity for antigen and assisting with the binding of large,
multimeric antigens. IgM also exists as a monomer and a hexamer,
but only the pentameric form is linked by the polypeptide, called
the
joining
(J) chain. The J chain allows the active transport of
IgM to mucosal secretions.
Many of the biologic functions of IgM are mediated by its ability to activate the classic complement pathway.
The complement
cascade consists of a series of enzymes that, upon activation, mediate the removal and lysis of invading organisms. Deposition of
antibody molecules or complement components on the surface
of the antigen assists with phagocytosis. Proteins such as antibody
and complement that enhance phagocytosis are called
opsonins.
Once the complement cascade has been activated, monocytes,
macrophages, or neutrophils engulf opsonized particles through
specific receptors present on phagocytic cells such as CD21,
which recognizes fragments of the C3 complement component.
Activation of the complement pathway also results in the generation of the membrane attack complex, which is composed of
late complement components and directly lyses C3-opsonized
pathogens. Because activation of the classic complement pathway
requires exposed Fc regions to be spatially close, multimeric IgM
is a potent activator of the classic complement pathway once it has
bound its antigen. For example, hexameric IgM is between 20 and
100 times more potent as an inducer of complement activation
than is monomeric IgM.
C1q is an early complement factor that
binds to IgM, as well as IgG. Immune complexes containing C1q
can downregulate immune responses because C1q binds LAIR-1,
a negative regulator that is present on the cell surface of myeloid
cells and lymphocytes. LAIR-1, when associated with C1q, can
suppress inflammation by preventing DC maturation and activation induced by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and by decreasing
secretion of proinflammatory cytokines by macrophages.
Immunoglobulin G
IgG is the most common isotype found in serum, constituting
about 70% of the circulating antibody. IgG antibodies are usually of higher affinity than IgM antibodies and predominate in a
recall immune response. Four subclasses of IgG exist in humans:

*TABLE*

Properties of Human Immunoglobulin Isotypes

> 13.1

> Characteristic

> IgM

> IgG

> Structure

> Pentamer, hexamer

> Monomer

> CH domains

> 4

> 3

> Serum values (mg/

> 0.7–1.7

> 9.5–12.5

> mL)

> Serum half-life

> 5–10

> 7–24

> (days)

> Yes

> Yes

> Complement

> activation

> (classic)

> FcR-mediated

> No

> Yes

> phagocytosis

> No

> Yes

> Antibody-

> dependent

> cell mediated

> cytotoxicity

> Placental transfer

> No

> Yes

> Yes

> No

> Presence in

> mucosal

> secretions

> Main biologic

> Primary antibody

> Secondary antibody

> characteristic

> response

> responses

IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. IgG1 and IgG3 arise in response to
viral and protein antigens. IgG2 is the main antibody produced
in response to polysaccharide antigens, and IgG4 participates in
responses to nematodes and is elevated in patients with IgG4-
related systemic disease.
It is worth noting that IgG4 is almost
always bispecific as a heavy–light chain combination of one IgG4
associates in plasma with a heavy–light chain combination of
another IgG4 maleate, thus creating two different antigen-binding sites.
All IgG subclasses exist as monomers and have a high structural
similarity. However, minor differences result in distinct biologic
effects. IgG3 and IgG1 are potent activators of the classic complement pathway, and IgG2 can initiate the alternative complement
pathway.
All IgG subclasses engage specific Fc
γ
receptors (Fc
γ
Rs) present on DCs, macrophages, neutrophils, and natural killer (NK)
cells. The Fc
γ
Rs on phagocytic cells, when cross-linked, mediate
the removal of immune complexes from circulation and initiate
antibody-dependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity, resulting in the
release of granules that contain perforin, a pore-forming protein,
and enzymes known as
granzymes
that induce programmed cell
Fc
γ
R engagement also allows
death (apoptosis) of target cells.
the internalization and subsequent presentation of antigens in the
context of class II MHC molecules.
Because IgG antibodies are the only ones that cross the placental barrier, they are critical for the survival of newborns. The
transport of IgG from the maternal circulation into the fetal blood
supply is mediated by the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn).
FcRn is

> IgA

> IgE

> IgD

> Dimer (IgA2), monomer

> Monomer

> Monomer

> (IgA1)

> 3

> 4

> 3

> 1.5–2.6

> 0.0003

> 0.04

> 11–14

> 1–5

> 2–8

> No

> No

> No

> Yes

> No

> No

> No

> No

> No

> No

> No

> No

> Yes

> No

> No

> Secreted

> Allergy and parasite

> Marker for naïve B cells

> immunoglobulin

> reactivity

also responsible for the long half-life of IgG in serum by blocking IgG catabolism.
Fc
γ
RIIb is an important inhibitory receptor
expressed on myeloid cells and B cells. Its function is discussed in
more detail in the section on co-receptors.
Immunoglobulin A
Despite its relative low concentration in serum, more IgA is produced than all other isotypes combined. Most IgA exists as secretory IgA (SIgA) in mucosal cavities and in milk and colostrum,
and only a small fraction is present in serum. Two subclasses of
IgA exist in humans: IgA1 and IgA2. IgA1 is mainly produced as a
monomer. In contrast, polymeric IgA2 is produced along mucosal
surfaces.
Polymeric IgA exists mainly as a dimer and includes a J chain
(the same chain that links pentameric IgM). It is captured by the
polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) that is expressed on
the basolateral surface of the epithelial cells and then transcytosed
to the apical side. Release of IgA into mucosal secretions requires
cleavage of the pIgR; a fragment known as the secretory component (SC) remains associated with SIgA and protects it from the
action of proteases and increases its solubility in mucus, where
it neutralizes toxins and inhibits the adherence of SIgA-coated
microorganisms to the mucosal surface.
People with IgA deficiency are prone to respiratory tract and
diarrheal infections, as well as an increased incidence of autoimmune disorders.
The presence of Fc
α
R on the surface of
neutrophils and macrophages has been suggested to play a regulatory role in the immune system; it is possible that autoimmune

manifestations in IgA-deficient patients arise, in part, from the
absence of immune regulation mediated by Fc
α
R.
Immunoglobulin E
IgE is involved in protection against parasitic infections but also
triggers immune responses associated with allergic reactions. Only
a small amount of IgE is detectable in serum, where it exists as a
monomer.
Mast cells and basophils express a high-affinity IgE
Fc receptor (Fc
γ
R) that binds free IgE. Cross-linking of the Fc
γ
R
by antigen-bound IgE induces degranulation and release of histamine, proteases, lipid mediators such as prostaglandin D2, and
leukotrienes, many of which are associated with anaphylaxis.
Immunoglobulin D
The role of IgD in the humoral response has been the subject of
multiple speculations. IgD is found predominantly as cell-surface
Ig on mature naïve B cells. Soluble IgD is scarce in serum; however, IgD-producing plasma cells are found in tonsils and tissues
associated with the respiratory tract, where IgD binds to galectin-9 on basophils and mast cells to enhance protective humoral
responses and inhibit IgE-induced allergic reactions.
High levels
of secreted IgD can be found in patients with autoinflammatory
syndrome.

### Immunoglobulin Light Chains

Two distinct L-chain polypeptides exist, designated
κ
and
λ
. L
chains contain a variable and a single constant domain. Even
though two L-chain isotypes exist, there is no known function
associated with the L-chain constant region. The
κ
chain is used
more often than the
λ
chain in human (65%) and mouse (95%)
Ig molecules.

### Immunoglobulin Variable Region

The recognition of a virtually unlimited number of antigens
requires a mechanism to generate Ig molecules with similarly
broad specificities. The molecular basis of this process has been
known for many years.
The Ig molecule is encoded by gene segments within distinct genetic loci residing on separate chromosomes (
Fig. 13.2
); the H-chain locus is on human chromosome
14,
the
κ
-chain locus is on chromosome 2, and the
λ
-chain locus
is on chromosome 22.
The H-chain variable region is encoded by a variable (VH),
diversity (DH), and a joining (JH) segment. The L chain is
encoded by either V
κ
and J
κ
or V
λ
and J
λ
segments; it does not
contain D segments. The human H-chain locus contains from 38
to 46 VH, 23 DH, and 9 JH functional gene segments (these
numbers represent a typical haplotype but vary among individuals). The
κ
-chain locus contains approximately 31 to 35 V
κ
genes
and 5 J
κ
functional gene segments; the
λ
-chain locus contains 29
to 32 V
λ
gene segments and 4 or 5 J
λ
functional gene segments.
Generation of Immunoglobulin Diversity
In a developing B cell, different VH, DH, and JH or VL and JL
gene segments are randomly combined to generate a large number
of different Ig molecules (see
Fig. 13.2
). This process, known as
V(D)J recombination,
occurs in the fetal liver or adult bone marrow in the absence of antigen stimulation and must be successful
to continue with B cell maturation. Here, we present the molecular process, and later the functional and developmental consequences are discussed (see the section on B cell development).
VDJ recombination happens sequentially, beginning with the
joining of one DH segment to one JH segment; then a VH segment will be targeted to the rearranged DHJH fragment. The
absence of an in-frame recombination leads to recombination of
the second allele. L-chain recombination also occurs in a stepwise manner. First, the
κ
locus is rearranged; then, in the absence
of a productive
κ
-chain rearrangement, the
λ
locus undergoes
recombination.
The recombination machinery is composed of specific enzymes,
including recombination-activating genes 1 and 2 (RAG-1 and
RAG-2). The complex recognizes recombination signal sequences
(RSS) that flank the V, (D), and J gene segments. These highly
conserved RSSs are composed of a palindromic heptamer (7 base
pairs) followed by DNA spacers that are 12 or 23 base pairs in
length and an adenosine/thymidine (AT)-rich nonamer.
Once
the complex recognizes its target, it generates double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA) breaks at the RSS sites. Next, the cellular DNA
repair complex recognizes and joins the cleaved segments. The
random recombination that occurs among V, (D), and J gene segments can generate a diverse Ig repertoire without the need for a
large number of germline H- and L-chain genes.
During H-chain recombination, nucleotides may be added at
VHDH and DHJH junctions by the enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT). These non–germline-encoded sequences
are known as
N additions.
As long as these nucleotide changes
do not disrupt the reading frame or lead to the incorporation
of premature stop codons, the random addition of N sequences
increases the diversity of the amino acid sequence. Imprecise ligation at the coding junctions may result in the loss of nucleotides,
thereby also enhancing diversity. Finally, random pairing of the H
chains and L chains further diversifies the Ig repertoire.

## Glycosylation

Immunoglobulins can be glycosylated in both the constant region
and the variable region, creating an immense level of heterogeneity on the antibody structure. Four main glycoforms exist: fucosylation, bisection, galactosylation, and sialylation; each has different
binding affinities for antibody-binding molecules on effector
cells. Hence, Ig glycosylation further modulates antibody functions. For example, sialylated Ig molecule can be immunosuppressive through an interaction with DC-SIGN, and galacotosylated
Ig increases association with Fc
γ
IIB to suppress C5a-dependent
inflammatory responses.
Patients with active autoimmune
diseases accumulate with agalactosylated IgG that are more
proinflammatory.

## B Cell Development

The final outcome of the maturation process is the generation of
a pool of mature B cells with a diverse repertoire of Ig specificities that can recognize foreign and pathogenic antigens without
compromising the integrity of the self. Therefore the process
of generation of Ig diversity is coupled with the censoring of
autospecificities.
B cells, as with all cells in the hematopoietic lineage, begin with
the differentiation of noncommitted CD34
hematopoietic stem
cells to lymphopoietic precursors with restricted lineage potential.
These cells, known as
common lymphoid progenitors
(CLPs), have
the potential to give rise to T and B lymphocytes, as well as innate
lymphoid cells. Early B cell progenitors begin to express genes
for DNA rearrangement, as well as B cell program transcription

> V

> n

> D

> 1

> 2

> D

> D

> D

> 3

> n

> 2

> V

> V

> 3

> V

> 1

> 3

> J

> 2

> J

> D

> 3

> D

> 2

> 3

> D

> 2

> J

> J

> 3

> D

> 2

> 3

> J

> 2

> D

•

*Fig. 13.2*

> V(D)J recombination at the immunoglobulin gene locus. V(D)J recombination at the heavy (H)-

> chain locus is depicted at the

> top

> . A single VH gene segment randomly recombines with a DH and JH gene

> segment residing on the same chromosome. After VHDHJH recombination, a transcript containing the

> immunoglobulin (Ig)M H-chain constant region gene (C

> V(D)J recombination occurring between a single DH and JH gene segment. The

> the heptamer, and the

> black squares

> represent the nonamer recombination recognition sequences. After

> recognition and cleavage of these sequences, the coding junctions of the rearranged DH and JH gene

> segments are ligated. A VH gene segment then recombines with the rearranged DHJH segment. Light

> (L)-chain rearrangement is mediated by the same mechanism.

factors. Multiple transcription factors act in concert, but Ikaros,
E2A, EBF, and Pax5 appear to be the most important in B cell
development.
Pax5 is considered the master transcriptional
control for B cells because it is induced in early stages of B cell
commitment and plays a dual role by repressing genes required
for differentiation to the myelomonocytic lineage and activating B cell–specific genes such as Ig genes, CD19, and signaling
molecules.

### Niches for Human B Lymphopoiesis

The development of hematopoietic stem cells (CD34
) into
mature B cells begins in the first weeks of uterine life. By the
eighth gestational week, early B cell precursors can be identified
in the fetal liver and omentum. From gestational week 34 and
throughout adulthood, the bone marrow is the primary site of B
lymphopoiesis.
It is unequivocally established that there are differences between the B cells that originate during fetal and adult
lymphopoiesis in mice, and it is becoming clear that these differences extrapolate to human lymphopoiesis as well. B cell precursors
are susceptible to estrogen, and the maturation of maternal B cells
is arrested at the pro–B cell stage during pregnancy; in contrast,
fetal B cell precursors lack estrogen receptors and consequently are
unaffected by exposure to hormones.
B cells originating during
prenatal life have a bias in the usage of DH and JH gene segments,
and this, along with low expression of the enzyme TdT, leads to
a more restricted Ig repertoire with shorter CDR3 sequences.
Whether during fetal or adult lymphopoiesis, the maturation of B
cells from CLP is contingent on the presence of stromal cells that
provide both contact-dependent and soluble signals.

> γ

> γ

> γ

> J

> n

> γ

> J

> 2

> µ

> 1

> J

> α

> α

> J

> 3

> δ

> ε

> γ

> γ

> γ

> γ

> µ

> α

> α

> J

> 3

> δ

> 2

> D

> ε

> V

> 3

> µ

> 3

> J

> D

> 2

> V

> 3

> VDJ-C

> µ

> transcript

> μ

> ) is generated. The

> inset

> represents an example of

> white squares

> represent

Although the nature of the interactions provided by the stromal cells to create a lymphopoiesis-permissive environment is still
incomplete, they include both survival and proliferative signals.
Interactions between chemokine CXCL12 and the integrin ligand
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) on the membrane
of the stromal cells and CXCR4 and very late activation antigen-4
(VLA-4) on the early B cell progenitors are required for homing
of the early B cell precursors to sites of lymphopoiesis and differentiation of B cells.
The molecules interleukin (IL)-7, IL-3, and
the Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 ligand (Flt-3L) promote B cell lymphopoiesis, although IL-7 appears to be dispensable for human
B cell development. Matrix molecules in the microenvironment
such as heparan sulfate proteoglycan are assumed to “trap” critical
soluble factors.

### B Cell Ontogeny

The state of Ig gene rearrangement and the expression of intra-cellular and surface proteins define the stages of B cell lymphopoiesis
into early B cell progenitors, pro-B, pre-B, immature, transitional,
and mature naïve B cells (
Table 13.2
).
Once a CLP begins to
express transcription factors required for B cell maturation, E2A
and EBF, the cell becomes an early B cell progenitor. E2A and EBF
enable transcription of the proteins involved in the recombination
machinery (RAG-1/RAG-2). The beginning of D to J recombination on the IgH locus marks the progress to a pro-B stage.
Pro-B Cells
The pro-B cell stage is defined by the rearrangement of the IgH
chain gene segments and synthesis of a
μ
-polypeptide. Pro-B cells

*TABLE*

Human B Cell Maturation Markers During B Cell Development

> 13.2

> Marker

> HSC

> Pro-B

> Pre-B

> CD34

> +

> +

> −

> CD19

> −

> +

> +

> CD10

> −

> +

> +

> CD20

> −

> +

> +

> CD21

> −

> −

> −

> CD22

> −

> −

> +

> CD23

> −

> −

> −

> CD38

> −

> +

> +

> CD40

> −

> +

> +

> CD45

> −

> +

> +

> CD138

> −

> −

> −

> RAG-1

> −

> +

> +

> RAG-2

> −

> +

> +

> TdT

> −

> +

> +

> Ig

> α

> −

> +

> +

> Ig

> β

> −

> +

> +

> Heavy chain

> −

> (DH–JH)

> + (VH–DH–JH)

> Pre-BCR

> −

> −

> +

> Surface IgM

> −

> −

> −

> Surface IgD

> −

> −

> −

> Light chain

> −

> −

> + (V

> κ

> -J

> κ

> V

> λ

> -J

> λ

> )

are dependent on interactions with stromal cells. VLA-4 integrin and CD44 both mediate adhesion to stromal cells, are highly
expressed at this stage, and are believed to be important for continued development.
Pro-B cells also express high levels of B cell
lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), a molecule that protects cells from apoptosis. At the onset of the pro-B cell stage, the variable gene segments
of both H- and L-chain loci are in the germline configuration
but accessible to the recombination machinery. Completion of
VHDHJH rearrangement leads to the generation of an H-chain
transcript that also contains the IgM constant region (C
μ
), which
is the constant region gene segment most proximal to the variable
region gene segments on the chromosome (see
Fig. 13.2
).
The generation of a
μ
-polypeptide and its subsequent expression on the surface of the cell, together with a surrogate L chain
formed by the
λ
5 and Vpre-B polypeptides, as well as the Ig
α
/Ig
β
dimer—a complex known as the
pre–B cell receptor
(pre-BCR)—
marks the end of this phase of DNA recombination. This constitutes a critical developmental checkpoint and the entrance to the
next developmental stage, known as the
pre-B cell
.
The requirement for a pre-BCR complex ensures that B cells without a productive H chain will die.
The pre-BCR stimulates pro-B cells with productive IgH rearrangement to proliferate. It also transduces a signal that the VDJ

> Immature

> Transitional 1

> Transitional 2

> Plasma

> −

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> −

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> −

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +/−

> +/−

> +/−

> −

> +/−

> +/−

> +/−

> −

> −

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

rearrangement was successful and halts recombination of the second
H-chain allele, which occurs when the first VDJ rearrangement is
nonproductive. This process, known as
allelic exclusion,
ensures that
all Ig molecules generated within a single B cell are identical and
have the same antigenic specificity. If no
μ
chain is generated, rearrangement is initiated on the other chromosome. If the second rearrangement also results in a nonproductive H-chain molecule, the
absence of a pre-BCR–mediated signal induces apoptosis. The odds
of generating a productive rearrangement are one in three, and consequently, approximately 50% of the cells that begin recombination
will be unable to proceed along a developmental pathway.
Pre-B Cells
The pre-B cell stage is characterized by L chain recombination.
Initiation of this stage requires the presence of the pre-BCR and
functional signal transduction machinery. At the transitional stage
from pro-B to pre-B cells, the expression of the pre-BCR induces
a proliferative burst that generates daughter cells with the same
H chain and potential for multiple specificities within daughter
cells, each of which may produce a different L chain. Targeted
disruption of genes encoding the pre-BCR complex such as the
IgM transmembrane constant region domain,
λ
5, or the Ig
α
and
Ig
β
accessory molecules arrests B cell development. In addition,

defects in the adapter molecule BLNK or the tyrosine kinase BTK
lead to a serious impairment in pre-B cell maturation. It appears
that the charged residues on the pre-BCR induce self-aggregation,
which activates constitutive signaling of the pre-BCR complex that
leads to clonal expansion of B cell precursors with a fit pre-BCR.
The expression of the pre-BCR is transient. After the proliferative burst, the
μ
H chain is present only in the cytoplasm as the
pre-B cell rearranges an L chain. Because TdT is not expressed
at this stage, L chains do not usually contain N sequences at the
VLJL junction. At the end of this process, pairing of the newly
minted L chain with the
μ
H chain leads to the surface expression
of an IgM molecule, complexed with Ig
α
and Ig
β
, to form the
BCR complex. It is believed that surface expression of the BCR on
immature B cells transduces signals that enforce allelic exclusion at
the L-chain locus and downregulate expression of the RAG genes.
This immature B cell has completed the gene rearrangement process and is now subject to repertoire selection.
Immature B Cells
Once B cells express surface IgM in the bone marrow, they are
subject to repertoire censoring. During this stage, cross-linking of
the BCR by antigen leads to the activation of one of several tolerance mechanisms to diminish the fraction of autoreactive cells
present in the mature repertoire. These mechanisms include deletion, receptor editing, and anergy (see later discussion on negative
selection).
During the maturation process in the bone marrow, the cells
become less dependent on interactions with the stroma and move
toward the sinusoidal lumen. Once they express IgM, they can
enter the blood, where they are called
transitional B cells.

Transitional B Cells
Once immature B cells egress from the bone marrow, they are
called
transitional cells.
These cells are the earliest B cells found in
the circulation in healthy subjects and move to the spleen to finish
their maturation. Transitional cells are the last B cell subpopulation that expresses the developmental marker CD24. At this stage,
B cells begin to express surface IgD, which harbors the same specificity as the IgM because the IgD H chain is encoded by the same
VDJ fragments as IgM but expresses the C
δ
instead of the C
μ
domain. It is the expression of IgD that separates transitional cells
into two different maturation stages. Transitional 1 (T1) B cells
that do not express IgD are the recent bone marrow emigrants,
and transitional 2 (T2) B cells that begin to express IgD represent
the subsequent maturational stage.
T3 cells are transitional cells
that have acquired an anergic phenotype secondary to exposure to
antigen. They are short lived unless rescued by antigen nonspecific
stimulation.
Transitional cells constitute a stage subject to multiple regulatory processes. First, transitional cells must compete with naïve
B cells already present in the periphery for a developmental
niche. Transitional B cells are extremely dependent on BAFF. In
its absence, B cell development does not progress beyond the T1
stage.
Second, T1 cells are still highly susceptible to tolerance
induction after BCR cross-linking. In T1 cells, cross-linking of the
BCR ex vivo leads to cell death, whereas T2 cells respond to BCR
cross-linking by proliferation and differentiation to the mature
naïve B cell stage.
Mature B Cells
The final stages of maturation that occur in the spleen and give
rise to the naïve B cell subset have not been fully elucidated, but
the prevailing theory is that T2 B cells give rise to the circulating
mature naïve cell population. In the mouse spleen, two populations of phenotypically and functionally different naïve B cells are
recognized: follicular and marginal zone (MZ) B cells. Human
naïve B cells constitute 60% to 70% of the circulating B cell repertoire and populate the spleen and lymph nodes. They include the
equivalent of mouse follicular B cells and represent the circulating, non–antigen-exposed B cell subpopulation characterized by
surface IgM and IgD expression, a lack of CD27, and the presence
of the membrane transporter ABC.
There is also a population in
blood of IgM
, CD27
B cells that have been likened to MZ B
cells, which do not recirculate in the mouse.

### Peripheral Naïve B Cell Subsets and Their Homing

After B cells finish their maturation in the spleen, naïve B cells can
home to secondary lymphoid tissues, which contain the microenvironment and architecture necessary for the retention of different
subsets of peripheral naïve B cells and activation of these B cells. It
is in these secondary lymphoid organs where mature B cells interact with foreign antigen, and specific humoral immune responses
are activated. These organs include the spleen and lymph nodes,
pleural and peritoneal cavities, as well as lymphoid structures in
mucosal tissue (e.g., Peyer’s patches, appendix, and tonsils). The
secondary lymphoid tissue is adapted to trap circulating antigen,
to expose the B cells to it, and to provide interactions with T cells
and other co-stimulatory cells. Peripheral lymphoid tissue contains specialized antigen-presenting cells known as
dendritic cells
(DCs).
In the Peyer’s patches of the intestines, foreign antigen
is taken up in specialized epithelial cells known as
M cells.
Even
though peripheral lymphoid tissues vary in structure and cellular
organization, they all possess antigen-presenting cells and B cell–
containing follicles surrounding T cell–rich zones.
As explained
in the following section, antigen, T cells, and DCs are required for
B cell activation and differentiation into Ig-secreting plasma cells
or memory B cells.
Follicular B Cells
Naïve B cells enter the peripheral circulation by passing through
the endothelial lining of the sinusoids of secondary lymphoid tissue and recirculating throughout the follicles of secondary lymphoid tissues. The entry, retention, and recirculation of B cells
through secondary lymphoid organs depend on both adhesion
molecules and chemokine receptors.
First, expression of
LFA-1 and VLA-4 is required for entry into the lymphoid tissue, and then the chemokine receptors CXCR5 and CCR7 direct
localization within the tissue. The CXCR5 molecule is expressed
on all mature B cells and mediates B cell migration to follicles
in response to the chemokine CXCL13, which is produced by
follicular stromal cells. These cells, in turn, are regulated by lymphotoxin made by B cells. In the follicle, the B cells scan for antigen, making contact with potential antigen-bearing cells such as
follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), subcapsular macrophages, and
DCs. If the B cell does not encounter a cognate antigen, it will exit
the lymphoid organ through the efferent lymphatics in response
to the molecule sphingosine 1 phosphate (S1P). Neutralization of
S1P leads to sequestration of B cells in lymphoid organs.
Marginal Zone B Cells
In mice, MZ B cells are present exclusively in the spleen and
do not recirculate. They localize to the outer layers of the

follicles surrounded by marginal sinuses. The adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, as well as S1P receptors and
cannabinoid receptor 2, are responsible for sequestering MZ B
cells next to the marginal sinuses, making them among the first
cells to encounter blood-borne antigens. In rodents, CD21
,
CD23
MZ B cells are phenotypically distinct from the CD21
,
CD23
follicular B cells. They also present functional differences from follicular B cells.
In the human spleen, the structural definition of the MZ does
not correspond exactly to the area surrounding B cell follicles.
However, there is a population with the functional characteristics
of mouse MZ B cells: low activation thresholds, highly responsive
to polysaccharide antigens, and with a clear surface phenotype.
These cells, which are sometimes named
MZ-like
or
unswitched
memory,
are not restricted to the human spleen but are found circulating in the blood, as well as in the lymph nodes, tonsils, and
Peyer’s patches.
They are defined as IgM
, IgD
, CD27
, CD21
, and
CD1c
.
Given that these cells possess the “memory” marker
CD27, it is suggested that they have experienced antigenic exposure; however, the presence of MZ-like B cells in subjects with
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (a CD40L deficiency) suggests
that even if antigen exposure has occurred, T cell help is not necessary. Interestingly, MZ-like B cells, although already present at
birth, do not seem to be fully functional at that time; infants up
to 2 years of age are particularly susceptible to infections by capsulated bacteria. This phenomenon might be due to the functional
immaturity of the cells or to the lack of development of the antigen-trapping microstructure.

B1 Cells
In mice, B1 cells represent a minor population of B cells that
reside predominantly in the pleural and peritoneal cavities and,
to a lesser extent, the spleen. They are named
B1
because it is
assumed that they are the first population of B cells to develop
during intrauterine life.
Phenotypically, these cells are defined as CD19
, CD43
,
IgM
, IgD
. About 70% of them express the marker CD5 and
are called B1a cells; the CD5
cells are called B1b cells. Whether
B1 cells originate from the same precursors as conventional B2
cells is still a matter of debate. B1a precursors have been found in
the splanchnopleure region of mouse embryos and fetal liver. B1b
precursors are not identified in the splanchnopleure region and
can be found in fetal liver.
These cells “self-renew” once populated in pleural or peritoneal
cavities. They proliferate to replace dying cells and consequently
maintain a steady state pool. Functionally, B1 cells are innatelike. They are activated more easily by TLR agonists and are less
responsive to BCR cross-linking than follicular B cells. Also, B1
cells exhibit less junctional diversity in the Fab than B2 cells and
possess a limited BCR repertoire. They spontaneously secrete
low-affinity IgM or IgA antibodies to a broad array of antigens,
mainly phospholipids and carbohydrate structures in the bacterial cell wall. Despite their low numbers, these cells secrete most
of the natural antibodies of the organism (antibodies that appear
without evidence of previous antigen exposure) and are assumed
to be the precursors of most of the plasma cells that home to the
intestinal lamina propria.
In humans, the definition of B1 cells is complicated. The CD5
marker has been used extensively as a surrogate marker for B1
cells with mixed success, given that activated human B cells also
upregulate the expression of CD5.
Polyreactive CD5+IgM+ cells
are present in humans, although the peritoneal cavity does not
possess innate-like B1 cells in the steady state.

## B Cell Activation and Differentiation

Upon encountering antigen, a B cell is triggered by the BCR signaling cascade to rapidly change its metabolic program from a
quiescent to an activated state with an increase in glycolysis and
upregulation of nutrient transporters.
Activated B cells, thus,
amass energy and biomass needed for clonal expansion. The
BCR signaling cascade ultimately initiates new gene expression
that guides activated B cells to undergo either differentiation into
memory B cells and plasma cells or apoptosis. The end result of
this process depends on the characteristics of the antigen; the B
cell subpopulation activated; the co-stimulatory signals provided
by cytokines, growth factors, and T cells; and the microenvironment with its profile of nutrients and metabolites.

### B Cell Receptor Signaling

The BCR complex is composed of surface Ig, noncovalently bound
to a dimer formed by the molecules Ig
α
and Ig
β
. The surface Ig
on the naïve B cell includes both IgM and IgD. The role of surface Ig is to recognize foreign antigens; the Ig
α
and Ig
β
molecules
transduce the signal through their cytoplasmic tails that contain
a particular amino acid sequence known as an
immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif
(ITAM). This sequence contains
two tyrosine residues that can be phosphorylated upon activation.
After phosphorylation, the ITAM acts as a docking site for the Src
homology-2 (SH2) domain to recruit tyrosine kinases and other
signaling molecules.
BCRs on resting B cells are highly mobile within the plasma
membrane, and they generate a ligand-independent tonic signal
that is essential for B cell survival.
After cross-linking by antigen, BCRs aggregate and translocate to cholesterol- and sphingolipid-enriched membrane microdomains termed
lipid rafts
.
The signal transduction events that occur after BCR cross-linking
are mediated by the recruitment and activation of intra-cellular
kinases including Lyn, Fyn, BTK, and Syk.
The most proximal event after BCR cross-linking is the activation of Lyn, which results in the activation of the phosphatase
CD45. CD45 removes the inhibitory phosphates on Ig
α
and Ig
β
.
Activation of Lyn leads to the activation of Syk and BTK.
The
phosphorylation of Syk triggers the activation of the phospholipase
C (PLC), phosphatidylinositol 3
′
-kinase (PI3K), and Ras pathways.
The activation of Syk appears to be absolutely critical for BCRmediated signal transduction because Syk-deficient cell lines exhibit
a loss of BCR-induced signaling. BTK also appears to be required
for the activation of second messenger pathways. In some patients
with X-linked agammaglobulinemia, a mutation in the
BTK
gene
results in impaired BCR signaling at the pre-B cell stage.
As a consequence, these patients have a greatly reduced number of mature
B cells and generate poor antibody responses. In mice, however, a
mutation in
BTK
leads to a disease known as
X-linked immunodeficiency.
B cell development is impaired at the transitional T2 stage,
and B cells that do progress to maturity are unable to respond to
certain T cell–independent antigens.
After recruitment and activation of the intra-cellular kinases,
downstream pathways are initiated. BTK, Syk, and the adapter
molecule BLNK are required for the activation of PLC
γ
. This leads
to breakdown of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate to diacylglycerol
(DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) to trigger calcium

> Activation

> BCR

> CD21

> CD45

> CD19 CD81

> Leu-13

> Ig

> α

> Ig

> β

> Blk

> Fyn

> Lyn

> BLNK

> MAPK

> Nucleus

> Gene expression

•

*Fig. 13.3*

> Molecules that regulate the activation state of B cells. Co-ligation of surface immunoglobulin

> results in tyrosine phosphorylation at specific tyrosine residues present in the immunoreceptor tyrosine

> activation motif (ITAM) of immunoglobulin (Ig)

> α

> and Ig

> after the removal of the inhibitory tyrosine residues of the B cell receptor (BCR)–associated cytoplasmic

> kinases such as Blk, Fyn, and Lyn, which is mediated by cluster of differentiation (CD)45. The phosphory-

> lated ITAMs recruit and activate the Syk and BTK kinases, which in turn activate a series of second mes-

> senger pathways (phospholipase C [PLC], protein kinase C [PKC], and Ras) that result in the upregulation of

> genes required for B cell activation and survival. Co-ligation of the pre-BCR complex (CD19, CD21, CD81,

> and Leu-13) results in phosphorylation of tyrosine residues residing in the cytoplasmic domain of CD19.

> Cytoplasmic kinases including Vav, Fyn, and Lyn become activated and enhance the signaling mediated by

> the BCR. After the activation of distal mediators of BCR signaling such as PLC, PKC, and Ras, molecules

> of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway become activated and translocate to the nucleus

> to regulate gene expression. Signals mediated by CD22, PIR-B, CD72, PD-1, Fc

> negative signals that block the activation of distal molecules. After phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor

> tyrosine inhibition motif (ITIM) present in the cytoplasmic tail of these molecules, the phosphatases SHP1,

> SHP2, and SH2-containing inositol 5-phosphatase (SHIP) are recruited and activated.

release from intra-cellular stores and the subsequent activation of
protein kinase C (PKC), which then leads to the translocation of
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and nuclear factorκ
B
(NFκ
B) to the nucleus. NFκ
B is a family of transcriptional factors consisting of homodimers or heterodimers of different subunits. NFκ
B regulates cellular processes leading to proliferation,
activation, differentiation into memory B cells and plasma cells, and
apoptosis. Furthermore, BTK activates Ras, which leads to nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1).
BCR cross-linking also activates mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) (
Fig. 13.3
). In addition, PI3K downstream of the BCR
and CD19 signaling leads to activation of the AKT-mTOR pathway
that regulates cell metabolism. Induction of these pathways ultimately transmits signals to the nucleus, where signals are integrated
to regulate gene expression.

### Phosphatases

Intra-cellular signaling is regulated by a balance of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Protein tyrosine phosphatases

> Inhibition

> Fc

> γ

> R

> CD22

> CD5

> PD-1

> CD72

> PIR-B

> IIB-1

> SHP1

> SHP1

> SHP1

> SHP1

> SHP1

> SHIP

> SHP2

> SHP2

> P-Tyr

> Tyr

> β

> cytoplasmic domains. This phosphorylation occurs

> γ

> RIIB1, and CD5 deliver

(PTPs) play a major role in restraining the magnitude and duration of BCR signaling; among these, SHP1 is a potent negative
regulator. SHP1 is found in association with transmembrane proteins such as CD22, Fc
γ
RIIB1, CD5, CD72, and PIR-B. SHP1
antagonizes BCR signaling by countering the action of protein
tyrosine kinases.
The function of SHP1 has been extensively
studied in mice that bear a naturally occurring mutation in the
SHP1 gene. Mice with this genetic defect are known as
motheaten mice
because of the appearance of their fur. These mice have
a decreased number of conventional B cells and an expansion of
B1 cells, and they develop a fatal autoimmune and inflammatory
disease.
The severe defect in B cell regulation underscores the
importance of SHP1 in limiting the extent of BCR signaling. In
contrast, the intra-cellular tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, although
structurally similar to SHP1, seems to be a positive regulator of
BCR signaling because it augments extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) responses.
The important role played by PTP in
disease is also demonstrated by the discovery that a single mutation in the PTPN22, a protein that regulates Src family kinases,
augments the risk of multiple autoimmune diseases.

Another important regulator, SH2 containing inositol 5-phosphatase (SHIP), is an inositol phosphatase that inhibits B cell
activation by removing the 5-phosphate from phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3), a critical component that recruits
membrane association of pleckstrin homology (PH) domain containing signaling molecules, including PLC
γ
2, BTK, and Akt.
Similar to SHP1 and SHP2, SHIP is recruited to an ITIM on
Fc
γ
RIIB after BCR cross-linking. Mice deficient in SHIP display
splenomegaly and elevated levels of serum antibody.

### Co-receptors

Along with surface Ig, many molecules can modulate BCR signal
transduction by either enhancing or diminishing the signal activated by antigen. These molecules include, but are not limited
to, the B cell co-receptor complex (CD19/CD21/CD81/Leu-13),
CD45, CD22, Fc
γ
RIIB1, CD5, CD72, PIR-B, and PD-1 (see
Fig. 13.3
). The integration of all these signals sets the threshold
for B cell activation.

CD19
The main positive regulator of B cell activation is the B cell coreceptor complex composed of CD19, CD21, CD81, and an
interferon-inducible molecule called
Leu-13
.
After antigen
cross-linking of the surface Ig, specific tyrosine residues contained
within the CD19 cytoplasmic domain rapidly become phosphorylated. Although the natural ligand for CD19 is not known,
in vitro studies have demonstrated that ligation of CD19 with
anti-CD19 antibody lowers the threshold required for BCRmediated B cell activation and enhances the proliferative effect of
anti-IgM treatment on B cells.
A role for CD19 in B cell activation has been clearly defined in mice that either lack or overexpress
CD19.
The CD19 molecule is required for T cell–independent
and T cell–dependent B cell responses and for GC formation. The
CD21 molecule serves as a receptor for cleavage fragments of the
C3 component of complement. Cross-linking of the BCR and
CD21 with complement-coated antigen has been proposed to
trigger the activation of the cytoplasmic tail of CD19. Mice deficient in CD21 also have impaired responses to T cell–dependent
and T cell–independent antigens and a defect in GC formation.
The functions of the remaining two components of the B cell coreceptor complex, CD81 and Leu-13, have not been characterized, although it is suggested that these molecules may mediate
homotypic cell adhesion.
CD22
In contrast to CD19, CD22 that also associates with the BCR
is primarily a negative regulator of BCR activation. Although
CD22 contains an ITAM motif and is able to recruit Src tyrosine kinases to its cytoplasmic domain,
it also contains a specific
motif known as the
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif
(ITIM). Similar to the ITAM, the ITIM contains a critical tyrosine residue. After activation of Lyn, it is believed that the ITIM of
CD22 is phosphorylated by Lyn, leading to the recruitment and
activation of phosphatases such as SHP1 that downregulate the
activation cascade.
Fc
γ
RllB
Simultaneous ligation of both the BCR and Fc
γ
RIIB1 sends
an inhibitory signal to diminish antigen activation of naïve and
memory B cells. This inhibitory signal is activated by the presence of immune complexes and provides a negative feedback
mechanism to attenuate an antigen-induced antibody response.
After co-ligation of Fc
γ
RIIB1 and the BCR, Lyn phosphorylates
Fc
γ
RIIB1.
The SHIP then associates with the Fc
γ
RIIB1 and
mediates the dephosphorylation of PIP3, the major product of
PI3K, thus inhibiting the recruitment and activation of BTK and
Akt and attenuating BCR signaling.
CD5
The role of CD5 in B1a cell function is not well understood. After
BCR cross-linking, CD5 is thought to mediate signals that induce
apoptosis and block proliferation.
Cross-linking of CD5 with
an anti-CD5 monoclonal antibody results in apoptosis. Some evidence indicates that CD5 recruits the inhibitory protein tyrosine
phosphatase SHP1 to its cytoplasmic domain. However, unlike
CD22 and Fc
γ
RIIB1, CD5 does not contain a consensus ITIM
sequence and may recruit SHP1 indirectly.
The ligand-binding
region of CD5 remains to be elucidated, but evidence suggests
that CD5 may interact with another negative regulator of BCR
signaling, CD72.

CD72
CD72 is a transmembrane receptor that is expressed as a homodimer. The cytoplasmic tail of CD72 contains ITIMs. Mice with a
targeted disruption of the CD72 gene reveal that CD72 plays a
negative role in B cell activation, presumably through recruitment
of SHP1. The B cell of CD72-deficient mice is similar to that of
viable moth-eaten mice with expansion of B1 cells and B cells that
are hyper-responsive to BCR cross-linking and are more resistant
to BCR-mediated apoptosis.
There are several putative ligands
for CD72, including CD5 and CD100.
Paired Ig-like Receptor
Paired Ig-like receptor (PIR)-A and PIR-B are expressed in a pairwise fashion, as the names imply. These receptors are believed
to have opposing functions, with PIR-A inducing an activation
signal and PIR-B inducing an inhibition signal. The ligands for
PIR-A and PIR-B remain to be elucidated. Although relatively
little is known about the role of PIR-A in B cell activation, recent
data demonstrate that PIR-B plays a role in downregulating B cell
responses. The cytoplasmic tail of PIR-B possesses several ITIMs
that recruit SHP1. Mice that harbor a targeted disruption of the
PIR-B gene exhibit a phenotype similar to mice that are deficient
in the other ITIM-bearing inhibitory receptors such as an expansion of B1 cells and B cell hyper-responsiveness.
Programmed Cell Death Protein-1
Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) is an inhibitory molecule expressed predominantly on activated B and T cells. The
ligand-binding domain binds ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2, and
the cytoplasmic tail of PD-1 contains ITIMs that recruit SHP2
to attenuate BCR signals. B cells of PD-1–deficient mice are
hyper-responsive to BCR signaling, and these mice display an
augmented response to T cell–independent type II antigens. On
certain genetic backgrounds, global PD-1 deficiency leads to an
autoimmune phenotype

### BCR Signal Transduction in Immature and Mature B Cells

An important event in BCR signaling is the recruitment of signaling components to lipid rafts, which are lipid-rich microdomains
of the membrane that serve to bring together requisite signal

molecules to facilitate integrated functions in three dimensions.
After antigen engagement, the BCR translocates into lipid rafts,
and the BCR signaling cascade ensues because of the clustering of
signaling components. In addition to activating signals, however,
inhibitory components also localize to lipid rafts. As discussed
later, BCR ligation mediates negative selection during the immature and transitional B cell stages and B cell activation during the
mature B cell stage. The reason for these two distinct outcomes is
not clear because the same signal components are present; however, differences in membrane cholesterol limit recruitment of the
BCR to lipid rafts in immature B cells.
Evidence also indicates
that the signal strength and duration and stage-specific expression patterns of signaling elements differ between immature and
mature B cells.

### Toll-like Receptors

TLRs are receptors for pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) that trigger the innate immune response but are also
expressed in B cells. Human naïve B cells express low levels of
TLRs, whereas memory B cells express higher levels. Mouse B cells
express TLR4, which is not expressed by most human B cells; thus
mouse B cells can be potently activated by the TLR4 agonist lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
TLR expression is upregulated by BCR or
CD40 stimulation. The response to TLR engagement in B cells
is mediated by common MyD88 pathway. In mouse MZ, B cells
also can differentiate into PCs only with TLR signaling, whereas
follicular B cells require BCR cross-linking. A single TLR7 gainof-function mutation causes prolonged B cell survival and ultimately systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), demonstrating that
aberrant TLR signaling causes human autoimmunity.

### Tumor Necrosis Factor Superfamily Receptors

The TNF superfamily (TNFSF) is a protein superfamily that
shares the TNF homology domain and is highly conserved in all
mammals. B cells express TNFSF receptors including CD40, B
cell activating factor-receptor (BAFF-R), transmembrane activator calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor (TACI),
and B cell maturation antigen (BCMA). TNFSF engagement to
receptors has distinct effects on B cell activation depending on the
subset and receptors.
CD40
CD40 is one of the primary drivers of B cell activation and class
switch recombination (CSR). Upon CD40L engagement of
CD40, it transduces signals through the canonical and noncanonical NFκ
B pathway and the PI3K/Akt pathway. CD40 also
stimulates CD40L, which is on CD4+ T cells. Thus the CD40–
CD40L interaction bidirectionally mediates T–B cell interactions.
Its detailed function is described later in this chapter.
BAFF-R, TACI, BCMA
BAFF and APRIL (a proliferation-inducing ligand) are proteins
produced by cells that take part in the innate response such as
macrophages and DCs, as well as stromal cells. They are present
as membrane-bound proteins or soluble trimers. They have three
known receptors (BAFF-R, TACI, and BCMA) that are present
on the membrane of B cells from the T2 stage to the final differentiation stage of B cells, plasma cells. BAFF binds the three
receptors, whereas APRIL binds only TACI and BCMA. These
three receptors have distinct expression patterns depending on the
differentiation stage. BAFF-R is absent in pro- and pre-B cells and
is gained in T2 B cells. BAFF induces survival and activation of
immature B cells when bound to BAFF-R. TACI is most highly
expressed in MZ B cells in mice and decreases the size of the B
cell pool, enhancing T-independent B cell response. In humans,
TACI is also expressed in memory B cells. BCMA is expressed
on plasmablast and PCs and seems to be critical to the survival of
plasmablasts in the bone marrow.
Enhanced survival and activation of autoreactive B cells have
been demonstrated in mice that overexpress BAFF.
An increase
in serum levels of BAFF has been observed in some patients with
SLE, rheumatoid arthritis, and Sjögrens syndrome and is thought
to contribute to disease pathogenesis because autoreactive B cells
that would normally be censored can survive in the presence of
excess BAFF. Belimumab, an anti-BAFF monoclonal antibody, is
used for the treatment of SLE (
Fig. 13.4
).
Leukocyte-associated
immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 (LAIR-1) is a novel inhibitory
receptor broadly expressed in immune cells, including B cells. The
transmembrane protein contains two ITIM motifs and regulates
phosphorylation of nearby signal transducers. It is expressed in
various B cell subsets in humans, but not in mouse B cells. Most
naive B cells express LAIR-1, but its expression decreases as B cells
become activated and differentiate. LAIR-1 expression is downregulated in circulating B cells of patients with SLE.

### B Cell Activation

B cells develop without bias for a particular antigenic specificity, ensuring that a diverse repertoire of different Ig molecules is
produced. After being stimulated by antigen and accessory cells
such as DCs and T cells, antigen-activated B cells undergo clonal
expansion; B cells that do not interact with antigen are destined
to undergo programmed cell death in a matter of days or weeks.
The B1 and B2 cell subsets are regulated by different activation
mechanisms and are involved in different immune responses
(
Table 13.3
).
B1 Cell Activation
B1 cells present in the pleural and peritoneal cavities respond to
T cell–independent antigens. There are two classes of T cell–independent antigens: type I, which includes lipopolysaccharide, and
type II, which includes large multivalent antigens with repetitive
epitopes, often found on the surface of bacteria. T cell–independent antigens can directly activate B1 cells, resulting in the
secretion of antibody. Soluble factors such as IL-5 and IL-10 also
appear to be involved in the maintenance and activation of B1
cells.
B1 cells do not require interaction with antigen-specific T cells.
However, activated T cells and macrophages may augment B1 cell
activation, enhance Ig production, and influence isotype class
switching such that B1 cells may also produce IgA and IgG.
Marginal Zone B Cell Activation
MZ B cells are situated in the marginal sinuses, where specialized macrophages trap and remove antigen from the circulation.
Like B1 cells, many MZ B cells express polyreactive BCRs that are
specific for microbial antigens, including both protein and carbohydrate molecules. If microorganisms reach the lymphoid organ
from the blood, MZ B cells recognizing microbial carbohydrates
elicit an innate-like T cell–independent response. MZ B cells can
also mount a T cell–dependent response against microbial protein antigens. Soluble factors such as BAFF and T cell–derived

> Soluble

> BAFF

> BAFF-R

> TACI

•

*Fig. 13.4*

> The B cell activating factor (BAFF) family of cytokines and their receptors. BAFF (also known

> as BLyS) and APRIL (a proliferation-inducing ligand) are expressed as membrane-bound proteins that can

> be cleaved by proteases to produce the soluble proteins. BAFF might bind the three known receptors:

> BAFF receptor (BAFF-R), transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interac-

> tor (TACI), and B cell maturation antigen (BCMA). APRIL only binds to BCMA and TACI.

*TABLE*

Markers of Human Mature B Cell Subsets

> 13.3

> Characteristic

> Naïve

> Unswitched Memory

> Surface IgM

> High

> High

> Surface IgD

> Low

> Low

> CD5

> +

> −

> CD21

> −

> −

> CD23

> −

> −

> CD11b/CD18

> +

> +

> Bone marrow progenitors

> −

> +

> Self-renewal capacity

> +

> +

> Response to T cell–

> +

> +

> independent antigens

> Response to T cell–

> +/−

> +/−

> dependent antigens

> Predominant isotype

> IgM

> IgM

> Anatomic locations

> Peritoneum, pleura, spleen

> Peritoneum, pleura, spleen

> Soluble

> APRIL

> BCMA

> Switched Memory

> B1

> Low

> High

> High

> Low

> −

> −/+

> +

> ++

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> −

> −

> +/−

> +

> +

> +/−

> IgG

> IgM

> Spleen, tonsils

> Spleen, lymph nodes, Peyer’s

> patches, tonsils, peripheral

> blood

cytokines are important for MZ B cell activation. MZ B cell activation can also be enhanced by CD40 ligand expressed on T cells,
even though an antigen-specific (cognate) interaction with T cells
is not necessary. Although the mechanism is not fully understood,
MZ B cells are constitutively partially activated and differentiate
rapidly into short-lived antibody-secreting plasma cells after activation by antigen. MZ B cells secrete predominantly IgM and, to
a lesser extent, IgG antibodies with minimal somatic mutation
and without an affinity maturation process. Thus these antibodies
display low to intermediate affinity.
Follicular B Cell Activation
Follicular B cells upregulate CCR7 after antigen stimulation. The
ligands for CCR7 (CCL19 and CCL21) mediate the organization
of the T cell zone and attract antigen-activated B cells to this border where cognate T cell–B cell interactions occur.
Engagement of the BCR by antigen signals the B cell to engulf
the antigen, process it intra-cellularly, and express peptide fragments bound to class II MHC molecules on its surface. After
the expression of peptide fragments bound to class II MHC
molecules, antigen-activated B cells present peptide to primed
T helper (Th) cells. B cells and T cells interact through T cell
receptor recognition of a peptide–MHC complex on the B cell
and through engagement of co-stimulatory molecules B7 and
CD40 on the B cell by CD28 and CD40L, respectively, on T
cells (
Fig. 13.5
). Expression of the B7 molecule is upregulated
on B cells after antigen stimulation. B cell activation during a T
cell–dependent immune response also depends on engagement of
the CD40 receptor expressed on B cells with the CD40 ligand
(CD40L) expressed on T cells.
The importance of signal transduction events mediated by CD40–CD40L engagement is evident from studies of patients with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome,

> Antigen

> BCR

> CD40L

> CD40

> CD4

> Naïve

> Activated Th

> MHC II

> Peptide

> B cell

> TCR

> CD28

> B7

> Cytokines

> IL-2

> IL-3

> Activated

> IL-4

> B cell

> IL-5

> IL-10

> IFN-

> γ

•

*Fig. 13.5*

> B cells as antigen-presenting cells. Antigen bound to surface

> immunoglobulin on naïve B cells triggers endocytosis and intra-cellular

> processing of the antigen. B cells engage antigen-specific T helper (Th)

> cells through the recognition of foreign peptide by the T cell receptor (TCR)

> and through the binding of a conserved region of the class II major histo-

> compatibility complex (MHC) molecule by CD4. Along with antigen bind-

> ing, co-ligation of CD40 and B7 (expressed on B cells) with CD40L and

> CD28 (expressed on T cells) provides critical co-stimulatory signals and

> the secretion of cytokines required for B cell activation.

> BCR,

> B cell recep-

> tor;

> CD,

> cluster of differentiation;

> IFN,

> interferon;

> IL,

> interleukin.

an immunodeficiency disease resulting from a defect in CD40L.
These individuals do not mount strong immune responses to T
cell–dependent antigens; they have high concentrations of circulating IgM but only trace amounts of IgG and no affinity maturation of the antibody response. Th cells secrete cytokines such
as IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IL-17, IL-21, and interferon
(IFN)-
γ
and provide co-stimulatory signals that are important for
B cell maturation and differentiation.
Upon encountering antigen, a naïve B cell with high affinity
for the antigen will activate and differentiate to a plasma cell that
will secrete IgM or IgG antibodies without somatic mutations.
If the activated B cell, however, harbors a receptor with low to
intermediate affinity for antigen, the cell will begin the process of
creating a germinal center (GC).

### Germinal Centers

As B cells progress to form GCs, they interact with cognate T
cells that are a specialized subpopulation of follicular helper T
cells known as
Tfh cells.
It is now clear that several subsets of Tfh
exist, distinguished by their cytokine production. The interaction
between activated B cells and T cells through CD40 and CD40L
induces expression of the transcription factor Bcl6 in both GC B
cells and Tfh cells. Tfh cells express CXCR5 and S1P receptor 2
and therefore can migrate to and be retained in the B cell follicle,
where, along with activated B cells, they form discrete structures
known as
germinal centers.
It is in the GC that antigen-activated B
cells undergo the process of CSR and affinity maturation through
somatic hypermutation (SHM) and finally differentiate into
memory B cells or long-lived plasma cells.
GCs can be subdivided into separate regions where the different stages of B cell differentiation take place (
Fig. 13.6
). The
dark zone is the site of rapid proliferation, and B cells within the
dark zone are called
centroblasts.
They are derived from a relatively
small number of antigen-activated B cells (
Table 13.4
). Expression
of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein is low in these cells, whereas
expression of the proapoptotic Fas protein is upregulated. Low
levels of Bcl-2 expression render developing B cells sensitive to
apoptosis, but these cells can be rescued by antigen and CD40–
CD40L interactions provided by antigen-specific Th cells. When
these cells migrate to the light zone, they are termed
centrocytes
and encounter a dense network of FDCs and Tfhs (
Fig. 13.7
). B
cells that express low affinity BCRs are outcompeted by B cells
bearing higher affinity BCRs, whose enhanced antigen acquisition
enables them to better interact with cognate Tfh, and thus they
are selected to migrate back to the dark zone and undergo more
cell division.
The interplay of chemokine expression and the induction of
chemokine receptors play an important role in the cyclical movement of B cells between the dark zone and light zone. The chemokine CXCL12 retains CXCR4
centroblasts in the dark
zone during the process of somatic hypermutation and isotype
class switching. CXCR4
centrocytes migrate back to the light
zone with a higher CXCL13 gradient, where survival and selection
events are mediated by interactions with CXCR5-expressing Tfh
cells and CXCL13-producing FDCs.
Later, CXCL12 promotes
the migration of plasmablasts to the bone marrow, where they
undergo further development into long-lived plasma cells.
The process of SHM is activated during the centroblast stage.
During this process, a nucleotide base-pair change is introduced
in the DNA sequence of the variable region of Ig H- and L-chain
genes, at approximately 10
per base pair per cell division. The

> FDC

> Resting B cell

> Centroblast

> Centrocyte

> Follicular

> mantle zone

> Memory

> cell

> Th

> Apical light

> ?

> or

> zone

> Plasma

> Basal light

> Th

> cell

> zone

> Dark

> zone

•

*Fig. 13.6*

> B cell maturation in germinal centers. After exposure to anti-

> gen, B cells in the primary follicles form germinal centers or migrate to

> previously formed germinal centers. Centroblasts located in the dark zone

> undergo proliferation and acquire somatic mutations. A small number of

> proliferating centroblasts can give rise to a larger number of centrocytes

> present in the basal light zone. As these cells pass through a dense net-

> work of follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) and T helper (Th) cells, centrocytes

> bearing surface immunoglobulin receptors with high affinity for antigen

> undergo positive selection. Centrocytes in the apical light zone are non-

> dividing cells that undergo differentiation into memory B cells or plasma

> cells. Centrocytes may return to the dark zone, where additional somatic

> mutations may be acquired. Resting B cells that are not activated by anti-

> gen are pushed aside to form the follicular mantle zone.

mechanism for SHM is complex and requires the enzyme activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) to target to specific
hotspot sequences.
The process of SHM is responsible for the
affinity maturation of the antibody response. B cell clones that
express surface Ig with an increased affinity for antigen are selectively expanded during the affinity maturation process, whereas
B cells that express somatically mutated Igs with low affinity for
antigen or novel binding to self-antigens are targeted for apoptosis
or inactivation. The importance of somatic mutation and affinity
maturation during an immune response is underscored by the fact
that patients with mutations in the gene
Aicda
encoding AID are
immunocompromised.
AID is critical for not only SHM but also CSR. Although
expression of IgM and IgD in B cells occurs through alternative splicing of a long transcript that contains coding regions
for both the
μ
and
δ
chain, expression of any other Ig isotype requires the excision of all the H-chain genes between the
recombined V(D)J region and the isotype to be expressed. Isotype switching requires preactivation of the particular H-chain
locus to be involved in the recombination event, which is controlled by the cytokine milieu in which the cell is activated.
AID induces the deamination of cytidine, creating dU:dG pairs
(instead of dC:dG pairs) that activate the cellular DNA repair
machinery and ultimately create circumstances that favor both
CSR and SHM. For CSR, CD40–CD40L interactions and
cytokines are also required.
As centroblasts become centrocytes, they require survival signals from cognate Tfh cells to overcome their low level of Bcl-2
expression and high level of Fas expression. FDCs are stromal cells
that trap antigen–antibody complexes by Fc
γ
R and complement
receptors in bodies known as
iccosomes
(immune complex–coated
bodies) on the cell surface. Iccosomes deliver an antigen-specific
signal to B cells through the BCR (
Fig. 13.8
). Centrocytes with
higher affinity BCR have a better chance to acquire antigen from
FDCs and present antigen to cognate Tfh cells. These centrocytes
receiving help signals from Tfh cells are saved from apoptosis by
upregulation of the Bcl-2 molecule. Engagement of the complement receptors CR1 and CR2 (CD21 and CD35, respectively)
on B cells by components of the C3 complement protein (iC3b,
C3dg, and C3d) bound to FDCs may mediate a secondary
If centrocytes do not receive these posico-stimulatory signal.
tive selection signals, they rapidly die through a Fas-dependent
pathway. Should they receive survival signals, they continue to differentiate into memory B cells or plasma cells.

### Ectopic Lymphoid Structures

Despite being the prototypical structure for the induction of
humoral immune responses, GCs are not found exclusively in
lymphoid tissue. Ectopic lymphoid structures with GC-like characteristics are present in sites of chronic inflammation such as the
synovium in people with rheumatoid arthritis, pancreatic islands
in people with type 1 diabetes, and salivary glands of people with
Sjögren’s syndrome.
These GC-like structures seem to develop as a consequence
of chronic inflammation, which leads to the release of soluble mediators such as the chemokines CCL21 and CXCL12
that recruit lymphocytes.
These cells, once activated, secrete
cytokines such as lymphotoxin that act in a paracrine manner
and contribute to the organization of a GC-like structure that
includes a dark and light zone with local induction of AID. In
contrast to the GCs of the secondary lymphoid organs, these
structures are not encapsulated. The B cells in these structures,
therefore, are continuously exposed both to the local antigens
that might be absent from the lymphoid organs
and to the
inflammatory microenvironment that may facilitate bypass of
the regulatory points in B cell differentiation, hence contributing to a potential autoimmune bias in these sites. Although no
evidence exists that these structures are the underlying cause
of any disease, in some diseases they may contribute to tissue
pathology and augment the pool of autoreactive plasma and
memory cells. Not all ectopic lymphoid foci share characteristics with the GC. It is not known which structures are more
damaging to tissue.

### Mucosa-Associated Compartments

Within the mucosal tissue, the sites of induction of immune
responses are distinct from the site where the effector cells reside.
There are two main sites for the induction of an immune response.
The first is the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) that
includes Peyer’s patches, nasopharynx-associated tissue, and isolated lymphoid follicles, where exogenous antigen is displayed by
specialized M cells that transport antigen to the follicle. The second site of induction includes mucosa-draining lymphoid nodes
such as the mesenteric and cervical lymph nodes.
B cells reach these sites through the systemic circulation. Once
they are stimulated by antigen and induced to differentiate, they

*TABLE*

Markers of Antigen-Activated B Cells in Secondary Lymphoid Tissue

> 13.4

> Marker

> Naïve

> Centroblast

> Surface IgD

> +

> −

> +

> −

> Surface IgM, IgG, IgA, or IgE

> −

> +

> CD10

> +

> +

> CD20

> −

> +

> CD38

> −

> +

> CD77

> −

> +

> Presence of somatic

> mutation

> −

> −

> Isotype class switch

> +

> −

> Bcl-2

> +

> +

> FAS

> −

> +

> AID

> Blimp-1

> −

> −

> GC

> B cell

> α

> β

> CD21

> BCR

> CD21L

> (C3 fragments)

> Antigen-antibody

> complex

> CD21

> FcR

> FDC

•

*Fig. 13.7*

> Engagement of B cells with follicular dendritic cells (FDCs).

> Interaction between FDCs and B cells results in signals that mediate the

> positive selection of B cells in germinal centers (GCs). Antigen–antibody

> complexes trapped on the FDC surface deliver a signal to the B cell recep-

> tor (BCR). A second signal is delivered by the binding of cluster of differ-

> entiation (CD)21 on B cells to C3 complement components on the surface

> of FDCs.

> FcR,

> Fc receptor.

home to the effector sites in the intestinal and respiratory lamina
propria, where they differentiate into plasma cells and produce
antibody mainly of the IgA isotype. An interesting characteristic of the plasma cells induced in the mucosal compartments is
their selective homing to mucosal effector sites. Nasal activation
leads to IgA-secreting cells with high levels of CCR10 and
α
4
β
integrin that home to the respiratory and genitourinary tracts in
response to their ligands, CCL28 and VCAM-1. Migration to the
intestinal lamina propria, in contrast, seems to be dependent on
orally induced activation and subsequent expression on B cells of
the chemokine receptor CCR9 and
α
4
β
7 integrin that bind to
CCL25 and MADCAM1/VCAM-1, respectively.

> Centrocyte

> Memory

> Plasma

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> −

> +

> −

> −

> +

> +

> −

> +

> −

> +

> −

> −

> −

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +

> +/−

> +

> +

> +

> +

> −

> −

> −

> −

> −

> ?

> +

### B Cell Differentiation

After antigen activation, B1 and MZ B cells rapidly differentiate
into antibody-secreting plasma cells independent of T cell help.
This innate-like humoral response generates mostly short-lived
plasma cells that produce antibodies with low affinity, but it
provides early and fast protection against blood-borne microbes.
It is antigen-activated follicular B cells that generate adaptive
antibody responses through a GC reaction that give rise to longlived and plasma cells. Memory B cells are mainly differentiated
from GC B cells but can also arise from GC nonexperienced
extrafollicular B cells.
Memory B Cells
Postgerminal center memory B cells express Ig genes that have
undergone CSR and SHM, and, in humans, they are distinguished by the presence of the marker CD27. The CD40–CD40L
interaction contributes to directing GC B cells to mature into
long-lived memory B cells. Like resting naïve B cells, memory B
cells are in a metabolically quiescent state. Unlike naïve B cells,
the survival of memory B cells does not depend on BAFF. The
exact life span of memory B cells is unknown. It is postulated that
these B cells either persist throughout the lifetime of the host
or
are renewed constantly through either nonspecific stimulation
or antigen-specific stimulation.
Quiescent memory B cells circulate throughout the body until
specific antigen is re-encountered and triggers a potent secondary immune response. A subset of memory cells expresses CXCR3
1
and therefore migrates toward inflammatory chemokines such as
CXCL9 and CXCL10.
Memory B cells respond to antigen much
faster, require lower amounts of antigen, and can even be induced
in its absence by soluble mediators such as IL-2 or IL-15, in part
because the BCR is already localized to lipid rafts. Subsequently,
just like naïve B cells, memory B cells ingest antigen and express
peptide–class II MHC fragments. After antigen presentation of

> I.

> APC

> II.

> Self-

> peptide

> B cell

> T cell

> (self)

> (foreign/self)

> MHC II

> T cell

> III.

> (cryptic

> peptide)

A

> I.

> B cell

> (foreign/self)

> MHC II

> Cryptic peptides

> II.

> T cell

> (cryptic

> peptide)

B
•

*Fig. 13.8*

> Epitope spreading. (A) Epitope spreading by activation of cross-reactive T cells.

> gen presentation of a foreign peptide that is recognized by cross-reactive T cells, co-stimulatory signals

> are delivered to B cells with surface immunoglobulin receptors that recognize a self-antigen as part of a

> complex of self-molecules.

> II,

> The complex is engulfed by a self-reactive B cell, and antibodies specific

> for self-antigen are generated.

> III,

> Self-reactive B cells process the self-molecules and present cryptic

> peptide–class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complexes on the cell surface.

> peptides are recognized by nontolerized autoreactive T cells, B cells specific for these cryptic peptides are

> activated, and the autoantibody response spreads to other components of the self-antigen complex. (B)

> Epitope spreading by activation of autoreactive B cells.

> mediate the endocytosis of a self-molecule that is included in a self-antigen complex. The self-molecules

> of the complex are processed and expressed on the cell surface of the B cell as cryptic peptide–class II

> MHC complexes.

> II,

> Cryptic peptides are recognized by nontolerized autoreactive T cells.

> provide co-stimulation to B cells that recognize cryptic peptides, resulting in the production of additional

> self-reactive antibodies.

> APC,

> Antigen-presenting cell;

> Cryptic peptides

> B cell

> (cryptic

> epitope)

> IV.

> B cell

> (cryptic

> epitope)

> III.

> I,

> After anti-

> IV,

> If these cryptic

> I,

> A foreign antigen that mimics a self-molecule can

> III,

> These T cells

> TCR,

> T cell receptor.

peptide to Th cells, memory B cells undergo expansion and may
differentiate to plasma cells.
Plasma Cells
The B cell differentiation cascade ends with the generation of a
plasma cell. At the molecular level, the differentiation program
is directed by the transcriptional repressor known as
B lymphocyte–induced maturation protein 1
(Blimp-1).
Blimp-1 induces
a program in which plasma cells lose expression of several markers because they no longer express surface Ig, MHC molecules,
or CD20. They initiate increased protein synthesis and secretion
and consequently exhibit a large cytoplasm with a well-developed
endoplasmic reticulum devoted to antibody production.
Plasma cells downregulate CXCR5 expression due to Blimp-1–
mediated transcriptional suppression and elevate expression of
EBI2, a chemotactic receptor that guides cells to outer follicle
areas and extrafollicular regions. Thus plasma cells exit the lymphoid follicles and migrate to extrafollicular regions of secondary
lymphoid tissue or to the bone marrow, where the final stage of
plasma cell maturation occurs. B cells in the GC are induced to
become plasma cells by IL-5, IL-6, and IL-21. Plasma cells have
a variable life span that may be days for short-lived plasma cells
that originate extrafollicular responses or years for long-lived
plasma cells that arise from the GC response and home to the
bone marrow.
The longevity of plasma cells in the bone marrow depends on
the presence of a niche that provides the survival factors CXCL12,
IL-6, APRIL, and TNF. Cross-linking the Fc
γ
RIIb expressed by
plasma cells induces apoptosis, a phenomenon that has been credited with pruning the plasma cell repertoire.

### Metabolic Changes During Differentiation

Duration and magnitude of activation vary according to differentiation stage of B cells. In addition, activation and differentiation
cues lead B cells to a distinct microenvironment in which nutrient and oxygen availability significantly differ. B cells adjust their
metabolism to each situation to survive.
Naïve B cells upregulate glycolysis through enhanced c-Myc
expression stimulated by activation of the BCR and CD40 or
by exposure to BAFF. These stimuli also induce Glut1 expression, thus promoting glucose uptake. In GCs, mammalian target
of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is activated due to CD40
engagement by CD40L. CD40 engagement promotes anabolic
programs and centroblast proliferation. GC B cells also appear to
rely on fatty acid catabolism for survival due to their high energy
demand.
Throughout an immune response, long-lived and short-lived
PCs are generated respectively through GC or extrafollicular pathways. PCs with longer lifespans utilize more glucose than shortlived PCs. Long-lived PCs use glutamine as well as glucose for
mitochondrial respiration. Memory B cell metabolism is not fully
understood. Activation of memory B cells rapidly induces glycolysis and activates mTORC1; however, it is yet to be described
whether these metabolic changes underlie the greater response to
the antigen than that of naïve B cells.

### Nonconventional B Cell Activation

Although it is a central paradigm that B cells require cognate
antigen for activation, infections induce an antibody response in
which only a fraction of the responding B cells are specific for
microbial antigen. This phenomenon, known as
polyclonal activation,
is induced by several mediators such as superantigen,
cytokines, or noncognate T cell co-stimulation and leads to the
production of self-reactive antibodies.
B cell superantigens include
Staphylococcus aureus
protein A
(SpA), protein gp120 of HIV-1, and erythrocyte membrane protein 1 of
Plasmodium falciparum.
These proteins share the ability to bypass the need to be recognized in the CDRs and bind
instead to framework regions common to Ig gene families. They
can therefore activate multiple clones; for example, SpA recognizes
Igs of the VH3 family that constitute up to 50% of the IgM repertoire.
Although the activation of multiple B cell clones by an
organism might be seen as an advantage for the host, polyclonal
activation leads to an extrafollicular response that, after a transient
hyperglobulinemia, exhausts the B cell pool, leaving a vulnerable
organism.
Noncognate activation of B cells clearly occurs in memory B
cells that are easily activated by the presence of soluble mediators such as IL-2, IL-15, or CpG (see the section about memory
B cells).
In chronic infections, polyclonal activation seems to
be a consequence of two non–mutually exclusive mechanisms.
The simpler one is bystander activation of noncognate B cells by
inflammatory cytokines. The second is CD4
T cell–mediated
co-stimulation. Noncognate B cell activation carries the intrinsic
risk of activating self-reactive B cells, as is observed in both experimental and natural infections.

### Mucosal T–Independent Class Switch Recombination

In the mucosa, IgA specific to commensal bacteria is induced
through machinery that is T cell independent and occurs outside
of organized lymphoid tissue.
Because this phenomenon is independent of T cells, other interactions must provide the required
signals for CSR. One of the candidate molecules is BAFF, which is
expressed by DCs in mucosal tissue. BAFF induces CSR in B cells
in the presence of IL-10 or TGFβ
, both of which are present in
the mucosal microenvironment.

## Repertoire Selection

The ability to discriminate between foreign and self-antigens is as
important as the capacity to mount a protective immune response.
Any molecule derived from the intra-cellular or extra-cellular
components of the host can be considered self-antigen; the censoring of the responses against these antigens occurs throughout
B cell maturation and includes multiple mechanisms in the B
cells themselves and in cells that cooperate in their activation and
differentiation.

### Tolerance

The random process of V(D)J recombination generates a diverse
repertoire of BCRs that recognize virtually all antigens and thus,
inevitably, also self-antigens. SHM during GC reactions also gives
rise to B cells with autoreactive BCRs. These autoreactive B cells
have to be purged by a process known as
tolerance.
Tolerance is achieved through signals provided by the BCR,
co-receptors, inflammatory mediators, and metabolic by-products that are integrated by the cell according to its developmental

stage. BCR cross-linking during development or in the absence
of co-stimulatory signals activates tolerance mechanisms in
immature and transitional B cells. The same mechanisms that
induce tolerance to self-antigen can induce tolerance to pathogens, and because some autoantigens are sequestered in sites of
immune privilege, cells specific to them are not subject to tolerance mechanisms.
The tolerance mechanism depends on the developmental
stage of the B cell and the strength of the BCR signal delivered
by antigen. The strength of the signal depends on the degree of
cross-linking of the BCR, which in turns depends on the concentration of self-antigen and the affinity of the antibody for
self-antigen. With little receptor cross-linking, because of low
antigen concentration or low affinity for antigen, there is no
BCR signaling, and the autoreactive B cell is not tolerized. Three
mechanisms mediate tolerance: receptor editing, anergy, and
deletion. When mechanisms that regulate autoreactive B cells
fail, the breakdown of self-tolerance can lead to the development
of autoimmune disease.
During B cell development, autoreactive B cells are generated
in the bone marrow after V(D)J rearrangement and expression
of surface Ig on immature B cells. Because of the vast number
of different antibody molecules that can be formed through the
random recombination of H- and L-chain variable region genes
and the random association of H and L chains, all individuals
generate autoreactive B cells. The tolerance process that prevents
the maturation of autoreactive B cells occurs with such efficiency
that, despite the fact that more than 75% of immature B cells bear
receptors with some degree of autoreactivity, about 20% of naïve
B cells do so.

Receptor Editing
A high degree of cross-linking of the BCR during development results in a process known as
receptor editing.
This process
involves a secondary gene rearrangement of the H- or L-chain
genes. Receptor editing requires reactivation of the recombination
machinery and re-expression of RAG-1/RAG-2. When successful,
receptor editing produces a BCR receptor with low or no affinity
to the antigens present in its environment, and the cell is allowed
to continue its development. RAG-1/RAG-2 can be seen in some
cells in the GC or extrafollicular region as well, and some authors
have interpreted this as evidence that receptor editing also occurs
later in B cell development, when autoreactivity is acquire through
somatic mutation.
Deletion
Extensive BCR cross-linking also leads to apoptosis, thus deleting the autoreactive B cell. This was the first mechanism of tolerance described for B cells
and was long believed to be the main
mechanism of central tolerance. However, deletion occurs only
when cells are not able to decrease their autoreactivity by editing the BCR. Tolerance through deletion is mediated primarily
through the activation of a series of endogenous proteases. In B
cells, the Fas pathway and the Bcl-2 pathway play important roles
in regulating apoptosis.
Fas (also known as
CD95
or
Apo-1
), a member of the TNF
receptor gene family, and Fas ligand are transmembrane proteins expressed on a variety of cell types. Clustering of Fas on
the cell surface, which occurs when Fas molecules bind Fas
ligand, activates apoptosis.
It appears that, when B cells
engage CD40L expressed on Th cells in the absence of BCR
ligation, Fas signaling induces apoptosis.
Mutations in
Fas
(lpr)
or Fas ligand
(gld)
in mice result in an SLE-like syndrome characterized by the production of pathogenic autoantibodies and lymphadenopathy. In humans, similar mutations
lead to lymphadenopathy and anti-erythrocyte antibodies, but
anti-DNA antibodies and glomerulonephritis are not found in
these individuals.
The
Bcl-2
gene family is composed of molecules that either
protect against or induce apoptosis in many cell types. Relative
levels of these molecules dictate the life and death of a cell. For
example, excess Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL promotes cell survival, whereas
excess Bax or Bim induces cell death.
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL are
upregulated at critical points during B cell development but
can be easily counterbalanced on BCR cross-linking. The fact
that certain mouse strains that overexpress Bcl-2 in B cells produce autoantibodies highlights the importance of apoptosis in
tolerance.
Anergy
Anergy is a hyporesponsive state considered to be induced in
immature B cells when they undergo a modest degree of BCR
cross-linking. Anergic B cells downregulate surface Ig receptors
and display a desensitization of the BCR, blocking activation of
downstream signaling. Anergic B cells are short lived. Classic
studies on B cell tolerance have been performed in mice engineered to express an anti–hen egg lysozyme (HEL) antibody,
along with soluble HEL, to act as a self-antigen.
In the antiHEL transgenic mouse model, B cells that encounter soluble,
monovalent HEL are anergized. These B cells populate secondary lymphoid tissue but do not secrete anti-HEL antibody and
are not recruited into B cell follicles. This phenomenon is known
as
follicular exclusion
.
Although anergy implies that the cells are not activated
through BCR engagement, they
can
be activated by non–antigen-specific T cell co-stimulation, lipopolysaccharide, or IL-4.
Exposure of anergic B cells in  vivo to multivalent antigen in
the presence of activated Th cells may also lead to their activation.
Consequently, it is suggested that anergic B cells may
serve as a potential source of autoantibody that may be activated
in inflammatory conditions.

### B Cells as Immune Regulators

The unique role of B cells in immune response is antibody secretion, but they also secrete cytokines. These cytokines include
lymphotoxin (LT), TNF, IL-6, and IL-10. LT and TNF are
critical for the formation of lymph nodes during development
and for maintaining a functional microarchitecture of lymphoid
organs. While many lineages of cells produce LT and TNF, LT
on the B cell surface and TNF secreted by B cells are required
for FDC generation and maturation, which is crucial to the
GC response. Patients treated with TNF inhibitors show poor
responses to vaccines, confirming its important role in humoral
immunity.
IL-6 produced by B cells induces nearby T cell differentiation
to Tfh cells
and GC formation. In lupus-prone mice, depletion
of B cell-derived IL-6 reduced autoreactive IgG production and
ameliorated the disease.
IL-10 promotes B cell differentiation to plasma cells, whereas
it suppresses T cell and monocyte activation. Because of its
opposing effects, the role of IL-10 in SLE remains controversial.

IL-10–secreting B cells are defined as B regulatory (Breg) cells
and are thought to suppress immune responses.
The function
of Bregs depends on stimulation through BCR and CD40. In
healthy people, Bregs secrete IL-10 in response to CD40 engagement, whereas the equivalent population in patients with SLE
fails to do so. Bregs are also able to mediate immunosuppression
through an IL-10–independent mechanism. Recent studies have
identified IL-35 as an additional effector molecule for Breg function.
Some IL-35–producing Bregs express CD138 and
Blimp-1. Thus activated B cells and plasma cells play an important role in regulating immune responses. These Bregs not only
harness autoimmunity but also restrain immune responses against
microbial infection.

### Regulation by Small Molecules

Beyond the classic activators and regulators, the molecules
described in the following sections play a particularly important
role in the biology of B cells and are highlighted given their potential as biomarkers and therapeutic agents.

Vitamin D
Vitamin D is acquired from the diet or synthesized in the skin,
followed by a conversion into a biologic product in the liver
and kidney. The active metabolite, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3, decreases activation and proliferation of B cells, as well
as differentiation to plasma cells. Circulating levels of vitamin
D tend to be decreased in patients with autoimmune disease;
whether this phenomenon contributes to the disease process is
not known.
Estrogens
The role of estrogens in B cell–mediated autoimmune diseases has
long been suggested by the female sex predominance within autoimmune diseases and may reflect a variety of effector mechanisms.
However, estrogens modify the B cell repertoire, allowing survival
of autoreactive B cells and alteration of the peripheral compartments in mice.
Leptin
Although its first described role was as an endocrine hormone with
a primary role in the control of metabolism, leptin later exhibited
immune regulatory effects. For example, experimentally induced
arthritis is attenuated in leptin receptor–deficient mice.
Leptin
promotes B cell survival and proliferation through induction of
Bcl-2 and cyclin D1.

### B Cell–Mediated Autoimmunity

B cell–mediated autoimmunity is the consequence of the production of self-reactive antibodies. We have detailed multiple
mechanisms operating throughout B cell maturation and differentiation that are designed to avoid autoreactivity. The failure
of only one tolerance checkpoint rarely leads to autoimmune
disease
; it may, however, increase the level of circulating autoantibodies, without clinical disease. The generation of a B cell–
mediated autoimmune disease must involve (1) the generation
of B cells bearing autoreactive BCRs; (2) the failure of mechanisms that, in the normal event, will abrogate their maturation
to short- or long-lived plasma cells; and (3) tissue malfunction
induced by the autoantibody that leads to clinical symptoms.

### Origin of Autoreactive B Cells

Theoretically, autoreactive cells can arise from any B cell subpopulation. In mice, B1 cells that bear BCRs with low affinities but
high polyreactivity produce autoantibodies, but these autoantibodies help remove cellular debris and can protect the body from
pathogenic autoreactivity. In addition, evidence indicates that MZ
B cells secrete autoantibodies, which may also provide a physiologic rather than pathologic function.
Age-associated B cells (ABCs) are a recently identified
B cell subpopulation. These cells are sometimes referred to
as autoimmune-associated B cells. They are characterized by
high CD19, CD11c, and T-bet expression and are found in
human and mouse spleens, in circulation, and in inflamed tissues.
These cells seem to arise from antigen-experienced B
cells driven by the T-bet transcriptional program. ABCs are
not effectively activated by their BCR alone; however, when
triggered with endosomal TLR 7 or 9 and IL-21, they rapidly
switch from IgM to IgG2 production and present antigens to
T cells. IL-6 is highly secreted by ABCs in chronic viral infections.
ABCs are expanded in elderly healthy subjects and
accumulate in patients with autoimmune diseases or chronic
infectious diseases such as AIDS and malaria. ABCs from autoimmune animals and patients produce predominantly autoreactive IgG.
In humans, CD19
, IgD
, CD27
, CXCR5
double negative
2 (DN2) cells also express CD11c and T-bet and are expanded in
the elderly and the SLE patients. These cells are thought to be a
subset of ABCs, but it remains unclear whether DN2 cells have
the same functions as classic ABCs.

### Autoreactivity in the Preimmune B Cell Repertoire

Studies of the reactivity of human B cells have shown that, in the
healthy peripheral B cell compartment, about 20% of the naïve B
cells bear some degree of autoreactivity; however, few of those can
be considered potentially pathogenic.
Indeed, autoantibodies
of the IgM isotype are critical for clearing apoptotic debris in a
nonimmunogenic fashion. C1q binds to IgM immune complexes
and to LAIR-1, an inhibitory receptor on essentially all immune
cell lineages. In people with SLE, the frequency of autoreactive
cells in the naïve repertoire is disputed. Some suggest it is as high
as 50% in the naïve B cell population,
while others suggest the
frequency of B cells reactive with nuclear antigens does not differ
between SLE patients and healthy individuals. The frequency does
increase during B cell reconstitution after B cell depletion due to
high BAFF levels.

### Autoreactivity in the Postimmune B Cell Repertoire

Most of the autoantibodies in patients with autoimmune disease appear to be generated through GC reaction because they
have undergone CSR and display extensive somatic mutation.
This observation suggests that the GC does not possess a failproof mechanism to effectively purge mutated autoreactive cells,
although post-GC receptor editing and deletion of autoreactive B
cells occur. The understanding of the tolerance mechanisms that
prevent the generation of autoreactive memory B cells and plasma
cells is still incomplete.

## Molecular Triggers of Autoimmunity

Several prevailing theories attempt to explain the activation and
expansion of autoreactive B cells that should normally be silenced.
Autoimmunity is thought to arise through a combination of environmental factors such as infectious agents that initiate an autoimmune response and genetic defects that alter B cell regulation.
Proposed models for autoimmunity include (1) cross-reactivity of
foreign antigen with self-antigen, (2) inappropriate co-stimulation,
and (3) altered thresholds for BCR signaling.
Much of our understanding of the breakdown of self-tolerance and the progression of autoimmunity comes from the
examination of mouse models. Autoimmune mouse models
can be divided into two broad categories: induced autoimmunity and spontaneously occurring autoimmunity. Even though
the progression of autoimmunity in humans is thought to be a
highly complex process that involves multiple genetic and environmental factors, these animal models have provided much
information about the molecular events that lead to a loss of
self-tolerance.

### Molecular Mimicry

One proposed model for the initiation of autoreactivity is that
cross-reactive anti-self, anti-foreign B cells escape central tolerance because self-antigen is present at too low a concentration
to trigger tolerance induction or because the affinity of the antibody for autoantigen is less than the signaling threshold. These
B cells become activated in the periphery by foreign pathogens resembling self-antigen and produce antibodies that bind
both foreign and self-antigen. This cross-reactivity is known
as
molecular mimicry,
and it is a popular model to explain the
induction of many autoimmune disorders.
Once the pathogen is cleared, the autoantibody response is usually diminished
because antigen-specific T cell help is no longer present, unless
a high number of long-lived plasma cells have been generated.
In the case of autoimmune-prone individuals, it is proposed that
intrinsic B cell defects prevent the downregulation of autoantibody production, even after foreign antigen clearance. Several
data support molecular mimicry as a trigger for B cell–mediated autoimmunity in some instances; for example, antibodies
to infectious agents have been identified that cross-react with
self-molecules associated with specific autoimmune diseases
(
Table 13.5
).
Intriguing examples include the cross-reactivity
observed between the M protein of group A
Streptococcus
and
cardiac myosin in rheumatic heart disease and the cross-reactivity between
Campylobacter
and aquaporin.
Because both nonautoimmune and autoimmune-prone people
have the capacity to generate autoantibodies, it is unlikely that
cross-reactivity between foreign and self-antigens is solely responsible for breakdown of tolerance. A plausible explanation is that
foreign antigen acts as a molecular trigger to initiate an immune
response to self-molecules, and a defect in the mechanism that
regulates B cell activation leads to the propagation of an autoimmune response.
In general, an initial immune response is generated against a
dominant set of epitopes, followed by a later response to secondary or “cryptic” epitopes, a process known as
epitope spreading
.
Epitope spreading is an important aspect of a protective immune
response because the ability to recognize multiple antigenic determinants increases the efficiency of the neutralization and removal
of pathogens. When an autoimmune response has been triggered,

*TABLE*

Evidence for Antibody Cross-Reactivity

> 13.5

Between Foreign and Self-Antigens

> Foreign Antigen

> Self-Antigen

> Yersinia, Klebsiella, Streptococcus

> DNA

> Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 1

> Ribonucleoprotein SmD

> Streptococcus

> M protein

> Cardiac myosin

> Coxsackie B3 capsid protein

> Cardiac myosin

> Klebsiella

> nitrogenase

> Human leukocyte antigen B27

> Yersinia

> lipoprotein

> Thyrotropin receptor

> Mycobacteria heat shock protein

> Mitochondrial components

> Escherichia, Klebsiella, Proteus

> Acetylcholine receptor

> gpD derived from herpes simplex

> Acetylcholine receptor

> virus

epitope spreading can lead to the production of additional autoantibodies with specificity for multiple self-antigens. There are several
proposed mechanisms by which epitope spreading triggers a cascade of T and B cell activation. For instance, antigen-presenting
cells may present a foreign peptide that mimics a self-peptide to T
cells (see
Fig. 13.8A
). Such cross-reactive T cells become activated
and provide co-stimulation to autoreactive B cells that recognize
self-antigen, which results in the production of autoantibodies specific for the antigen recognized by the T cell. After internalization
of the self-antigen by the autoreactive B cells, the autoantigen is
processed, and new cryptic epitopes of the self-antigen are presented
to T cells. A B cell binding to the self-antigen internalizes not only
that self-antigen but also any complex of molecules that includes
the self-antigen. The B cell may, therefore, present cryptic epitopes
of many self-antigens and activate autoreactive T cells representing
multiple autospecificities. In the periphery, T cells are present that
have not been tolerized to these (cryptic) epitopes and thus are activated by self-peptide. These activated T cells in turn help provide
co-stimulation and activate other autoreactive B cells.
Alternatively, cross-reactive B cells may be activated first after
exposure to foreign antigen and T cell help (see
Fig. 13.8B
). These
B cells internalize self-antigen and present cryptic peptides to T
cells that have not been tolerized, leading to activation of autoreactive T cells and initiation of the cascade. Thus molecular mimicry and epitope spreading could lead to the activation of T cells
and B cells specific for multiple autoantigens as long as the autoantigens form a complex in vivo.

### Supraoptimal B Cell Co-stimulation

It is evident that co-stimulatory signals provided by T cells
play a critical role in B cell activation. Therefore inappropriate
co-stimulation may lead to the propagation of an immune response
directed against a self-antigen. The interaction between B7 on B
cells and CD28 on T cells is crucial for the activation of antigenspecific T cells and B cells. When a genetically engineered protein
that inhibits B7-CD28 interactions is administered to autoimmune

mice, progression of disease is blocked.
Reciprocally, autoreactive B cells present in mice that constitutively overexpress B7 are
not sensitive to Fas killing, and the mice display high serum autoantibody titers.
Overexpression of CD40 or CD40L may also
activate autoreactivity. In  vitro studies have demonstrated that
CD40–CD40L ligation in the presence of IL-4 activates anergic
cells. CD40L may be overexpressed in lymphoid cells of patients
with SLE.
Roquin-1/RC3H1, a putative ubiquitin E3 ligase, regulates
differentiation of Tfh. Roquin-1 is an RNA-binding protein that
mediates mRNA degradation.
It represses the expression of multiple inflammatory cytokines, including ICOS, a co-stimulatory
molecule that plays an important role in Tfh development and
function. Tfh cells provide strong co-stimulation in the GC. Mice
harboring a mutation in the gene encoding Roquin display highaffinity dsDNA antibodies as a result of increased numbers of Tfh
and GC B cells.
Interferon regulatory factor-4–binding protein (IBP) also regulates T cell co-stimulatory signals.
IBP is an activator of Rho
guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) and is recruited to the immunologic synapse after T cell receptor cross-linking to mediate the
reorganization of the cytoskeleton. Mice deficient in IBP exhibit an
autoimmune phenotype characterized by the production of dsDNA
antibodies and glomerulonephritis. IBP plays an important role in
the survival and effector function of memory T cells. In addition,
IBP sequesters the transcription factor IRF4, thus preventing it
from turning on expression of IL-17 and IL-21.
TLRs belong to a family of pathogen recognition receptors that
initiate innate immune responses to various components of pathogens. TLRs are expressed on the cell surface or are localized in
the endosomes. Thus TLR4 on the plasma membrane binds bacterial lipopolysaccharides, and endosomal TLR7 and TLR9 recognize RNA and hypomethylated CpG-containing nucleic acid
sequences, respectively, within B cells. In addition to their role in
DC maturation and T cell activation and differentiation, TLRs are
directly involved in multiple steps of antibody responses. Some T
cell–independent antigens, such as LPSs, engage both BCRs and
TLR signaling pathways that induce strong B cell activation. During a T cell–dependent response, co-stimulation of TLR enhances
BCR-mediated uptake of antigen and boosts AID induction for
CSR and GC reactions. TLR activation has also been linked with
chronic inflammation and autoimmune diseases. Numerous studies suggest that engagement of the BCR and TLR with immune
complexes containing nuclear antigens triggers the activation of
antinuclear B cells, implying that TLR7 and TLR9 can function to enhance the activation of autoreactive B cells under some
circumstances.

### B Cell Signaling Thresholds

The effects of altering the threshold for BCR signaling have been
demonstrated in several mouse models. In transgenic mice that
overexpress the BCR co-receptor complex component CD19,
anergic B cells are activated and secrete autoantibody.
This
result suggests that a decrease in the minimal requirement for
antigen engagement of the BCR can lead to inappropriate
activation of autoreactive B cells. Viable moth-eaten mice also
develop an autoimmune syndrome due to a naturally occurring
deficiency in the SHP1 phosphatase, a potent negative regulator of BCR signaling.
In these mice, B1 cells are responsible
for the production of IgM anti-DNA antibodies. Transgenic
mice deficient in other signaling molecules that alter threshold
activation such as CD22 and Lyn also produce autoantibodies.
Thus lowering thresholds for antigen-induced B cell
activation can lead to the activation of autoreactive B cells.
It is now known that co-stimulation and the strength of
T cell receptor signaling coordinate cellular metabolism and
transcriptional programs to guide T cell differentiation into
specialized effector subsets. It is not yet known whether parallel
metabolic reprograming affects B cell fates and functions. That
anergic B cells are metabolically suppressed and that inhibiting glycolysis by 2-deoxy-glucose treatment in vivo seems to
inhibit autoantibody production indicate that manipulations
of immunometabolism can change the outcome of humoral
responses.

## Conclusion

The generation of a diverse repertoire of antibody molecules provides an important line of defense against microbial infections.
The immune system is exquisitely controlled at multiple levels to
allow the maturation of B cells that produce protective antibodies while attempting to avoid the production of autoantibodies (
Fig. 13.9
). Only a small percentage of the B cell precursors
generated completes the maturation pathway. During the pro-B
and pre-B cell stages of development, B cells with aberrantly
rearranged H- or L-chain genes are eliminated. As the remaining precursor cells transit into the immature B cell stage, they
are subject to negative selection; that is, immature B cells with
autospecificity are either deleted or inactivated, whereas nonautoreactive B cells are released into the periphery. B cells that
are stimulated by foreign antigen are selectively expanded and
undergo further Ig gene diversification in peripheral lymphoid
tissue. During this stage of development, B cells that express
high-affinity BCRs undergo positive selection, whereas B cells
with a diminished affinity or those that have acquired autoreactivity are eliminated. B cells that pass through these critical
developmental checkpoints differentiate into long-lived memory
B cells or plasma cells. The underlying causes of B cell–associated autoimmunity are not fully understood, but just as there are
multiple checkpoints for the survival or activation of autoreactive B cells, it seems likely that multiple defects in the regulatory
mechanisms that control B cell maturation and differentiation
contribute to autoimmune disease.

Full references for this chapter can be found on Elsevier eBooks+.

> Bone marrow

> Pro-B

> HC

> Negative

> rearrangement

> selection (2)

> Pre-B

> Transitional

> LC

> 1

> rearrangement

> Negative

> Immature

> selection (1)

> Bone marrow

> Plasma

•

*Fig. 13.9*

> Selection checkpoints during B cell maturation. Autoreactive B cells can be censored at multiple

> developmental checkpoints:

> (1)

> After surface expression of surface immunoglobulin, immature B cells that

> encounter autoantigen in the bone marrow are subject to negative selection.

> nated in the bone marrow may undergo negative selection during the transitional B cell stage. Transitional

> B cells that emerge from this development stage give rise to follicular (FO) or marginal zone (MZ) B cells.

> Follicular B cells activated by antigen and the help of cognate T cells progress to the germinal center (GC)

> B cell stage.

> (3)

> Germinal center B cells that acquire high affinity for autoantigen by the process of somatic

> hypermutation may be eliminated in the germinal center to block their further maturation into long-lived

> plasma cells or memory cells.

> (4)

> There is evidence that autoreactive plasmablasts may also be subject to

> negative selection. Long-lived plasma cells that emerge from the selection process home primarily to the

> bone marrow, and memory B cells circulate throughout the periphery.

## Selected References

> 1.	 Schroeder H, Wald D, Greenspan N: Immunoglobulins: structure

> and function. In Paul W, editor:

> Fundamental immunology

> , Phila-

> delphia, 2008, Lippincott-Raven, pp 125–151.

> 2.	 Janeway C, Travers P, Walport M, et al.: The structure of a typical

> antiody molecule.

> Immunobiology

> , New York, Garland, 2001, p 96.

> 3.	 Janeway C, Travers P, Walport M, et al.: Structural variation in

> immunoglobulin constant regions.

> Immunobiology

> , New York, Gar-

> land, 2001, p 142.

> 4.	 Raghavan M, Bjorkman PJ: Fc receptors and their interactions with

> immunoglobulins,

> Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol

> 12:181–220, 1996.

> 5.	 Desai DD, Harbers SO, Flores M, et al.: Fc gamma receptor IIB on

> dendritic cells enforces peripheral tolerance by inhibiting effector T

> cell responses,

> J Immunol

> 178:6217–6226, 2007.

> 6.	 Xiang Z, Cutler AJ, Brownlie RJ, et  al.: FcgammaRIIb controls

> bone marrow plasma cell persistence and apoptosis,

> Nat Immunol

> 8:419–429, 2007.

> 7.	 Johansen FE, Braathen R, Brandtzaeg P: Role of J chain in secre-

> tory immunoglobulin formation,

> Scand J Immunol

> 52:240–248,

> 2000.

> 8.	 Wiersma EJ, Collins C, Fazel S, Shulman MJ: Structural and func-

> tional analysis of J chain-deficient IgM,

> J Immunol

> 160:5979–5989,

> 1998.

> 9.	 Snapper C, Finkelman F: Immunoglobulin class switching. In Paul

> W, editor:

> Immunology

> , Philadelphia Lippincott-Raven, 1999,

> p 831.

> Spleen

> MZ

> Transitional

> FO

> 2

> Negative

> GC

> selection (3)

> Plasmablast

> Negative

> selection (4)?

> Memory

> Periphery

> (2)

> B cells that are not elimi-

> HC,

> Heavy chain;

> LC,

> light chain.

> 10.	 Froelich CJ, Hanna WL, Poirier GG, et  al.: Granzyme B/per-

> forin-mediated apoptosis of Jurkat cells results in cleavage of

> poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase to the 89-kDa apoptotic fragment

> and less abundant 64-kDa fragment,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 227:658–665, 1996.

> 11.	 Janssen EM, Lemmens EE, Gour N, et al.: Distinct roles of cyto-

> lytic effector molecules for antigen-restricted killing by CTL

> in vivo,

> Immunol Cell Biol

> 88:761–765, 2010.

> 12.	 Simister NE, Mostov KE: An Fc receptor structurally related to

> MHC class I antigens,

> Nature

> 337:184–187, 1989.

> 13.	 Roopenian DC, Christianson GJ, Sproule TJ, et al.: The MHC class

> I-like IgG receptor controls perinatal IgG transport, IgG homeostasis,

> and fate of IgG-Fc-coupled drugs,

> J Immunol

> 170:3528–3533, 2003.

> 14.	 Macpherson AJ, McCoy KD, Johansen FE, Brandtzaeg P: The

> immune geography of IgA induction and function,

> Mucosal Immu-

> nol

> 1:11–22, 2008.

> 15.	 Woof JM, Kerr MA: The function of immunoglobulin A in immu-

> nity,

> J Pathol

> 208:270–282, 2006.

> 16.	 Yel L: Selective IgA deficiency,

> J Clin Immunol

> 30:10–16, 2010.

> 17.	 Pasquier B, Launay P, Kanamaru Y, et al.: Identification of Fcal-

> phaRI as an inhibitory receptor that controls inflammation: dual

> role of FcRgamma ITAM,

> Immunity

> 22:31–42, 2005.

> 18.	 Gould HJ, Sutton BJ: IgE in allergy and asthma today,

> Nat Rev

> Immunol

> 8:205–217, 2008.

> 19.	 Shan M, Carrillo J, Yeste A, et al.: Secreted IgD amplifies humoral

> T helper 2 cell responses by binding basophils via galectin-9 and

> CD44,

> Immunity

> 49:709–724 e8, 2018.

> 20.	 Chen K, Cerutti A: New insights into the enigma of immunoglob-

> ulin D,

> Immunol Rev

> 237:160–179, 2010.

> 21.	 Mulders-Manders CM, Simon A: Hyper-IgD syndrome/mevalon-

> ate kinase deficiency: what is new?

> Semin Immunopathol

> 37:371–

> 376, 2015.

> 22.	 Gorman JR, Alt FW: Regulation of immunoglobulin light chain

> isotype expression,

> Adv Immunol

> 69:113–181, 1998.

> 23.	 Brack C, Hirama M, Lenhard-Schuller R, Tonegawa S: A complete

> immunoglobulin gene is created by somatic recombination,

> Cell

> 15:1–14, 1978.

> 24.	 Croce CM, Shander M, Martinis J, et al.: Chromosomal location of

> the genes for human immunoglobulin heavy chains,

> Proc Natl Acad

> Sci U S A

> 76:3416–3419, 1979.

> 25.	 McBride OW, Hieter PA, Hollis GF, Swan D, Otey MC, Leder P:

> Chromosomal location of human kappa and lambda immunoglob-

> ulin light chain constant region genes,

> J Exp Med

> 155:1480–1490,

> 1982.

> 26.	 LeFrane M: Nomenclature of the human immunoglobulin genes,

> Curr Protoc Immunol

> , 2001. Appedix 1, Appendix 1P.

> 27.	 Thomas LR, Cobb RM, Oltz EM: Dynamic regulation of antigen

> receptor gene assembly,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 650:103–115, 2009.

> 28.	 Akira S, Okazaki K, Sakano H: Two pairs of recombination signals

> are sufficient to cause immunoglobulin V-(D)-J joining,

> Science

> 238:1134–1138, 1987.

> 29.	 Karsten CM, Pandey MK, Figge J, et al.: Anti-inflammatory activ-

> ity of IgG1 mediated by Fc galactosylation and association of

> FcgammaRIIB and dectin-1,

> Nat Med

> 18:1401–1406, 2012.

> 30.	 Tomana M, Schrohenloher RE, Reveille JD, Arnett FC, Koop-

> man WJ: Abnormal galactosylation of serum IgG in patients with

> systemic lupus erythematosus and members of families with high

> frequency of autoimmune diseases,

> Rheumatol Int

> 12:191–194,

> 1992.

> 31.	 Ramirez J, Lukin K, Hagman J: From hematopoietic progenitors to

> B cells: mechanisms of lineage restriction and commitment,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 22:177–184, 2010.

> 32.	 Nutt SL, Heavey B, Rolink AG, Busslinger M: Commitment to

> the B-lymphoid lineage depends on the transcription factor Pax5,

> Nature

> 401:556–562, 1999.

> 33.	 Solvason N, Kearney JF: The human fetal omentum: a site of B cell

> generation,

> J Exp Med

> 175:397–404, 1992.

> 34.	 Igarashi H, Kouro T, Yokota T, Comp PC, Kincade PW: Age and

> stage dependency of estrogen receptor expression by lymphocyte

> precursors,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 98:15131–15136, 2001.

> 35.	 Souto-Carneiro MM, Sims GP, Girschik H, Lee J, Lipsky PE:

> Developmental changes in the human heavy chain CDR3,

> J Immu-

> nol

> 175:7425–7436, 2005.

> 36.	 Coulomb-L’Hermin A, Amara A, Schiff C, et al.: Stromal cell-

> derived factor 1 (SDF-1) and antenatal human B cell lympho-

> poiesis: expression of SDF-1 by mesothelial cells and biliary

> ductal plate epithelial cells,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 96:8585–

> 8590, 1999.

> 37.	 Gupta P, McCarthy JB, Verfaillie CM: Stromal fibroblast heparan

> sulfate is required for cytokine-mediated ex vivo maintenance of

> human long-term culture-initiating cells,

> Blood

> 87:3229–3236,

> 1996.

> 38.	 Melchers F: Checkpoints that control B cell development,

> J Clin

> Invest

> 125:2203–2210, 2015.

> 39.	 Duchosal MA: B-cell development and differentiation,

> Semin

> Hematol

> 34:2–12, 1997.

> 40.	 Herzog S, Reth M, Jumaa H: Regulation of B-cell proliferation and

> differentiation by pre-B-cell receptor signalling,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 9:195–205, 2009.

> 41.	 Ohnishi K, Melchers F: The nonimmunoglobulin portion of

> lambda5 mediates cell-autonomous pre-B cell receptor signaling,

> Nat Immunol

> 4:849–856, 2003.

> 42.	 Lortan JE, Oldfield S, Roobottom CA, MacLennan IC: Migration

> of newly-produced virgin B cells from bone marrow to secondary

> lymphoid organs,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 237:87–92, 1988.

> 43.	 Carsetti R, Rosado MM, Wardmann H: Peripheral development of

> B cells in mouse and man,

> Immunol Rev

> 197:179–191, 2004.

> 44.	 Teague BN, Pan Y, Mudd PA, et al.: Cutting edge: transitional T3

> B cells do not give rise to mature B cells, have undergone selec-

> tion, and are reduced in murine lupus,

> J Immunol

> 178:7511–7515,

> 2007.

> 45.	 Gross JA, Dillon SR, Mudri S, et al.: TACI-Ig neutralizes molecules

> critical for B cell development and autoimmune disease. impaired

> B cell maturation in mice lacking BLyS,

> Immunity

> 15:289–302,

> 2001.

> 46.	 Wirths S, Lanzavecchia A: ABCB1 transporter discriminates

> human resting naive B cells from cycling transitional and memory

> B cells,

> Eur J Immunol

> 35:3433–3441, 2005.

> 47.	 Weller S, Braun MC, Tan BK, et al.: Human blood IgM “memory” B

> cells are circulating splenic marginal zone B cells harboring a prediversi-

> fied immunoglobulin repertoire,

> Blood

> 104:3647–3654, 2004.

> 48.	 Manser T: Textbook germinal centers?

> J Immunol

> 172:3369–3375,

> 2004.

> 49.	 Kim CH: The greater chemotactic network for lymphocyte traf-

> ficking: chemokines and beyond,

> Curr Opin Hematol

> 12:298–304,

> 2005.

> 50.	 Muller G, Lipp M: Concerted action of the chemokine and lym-

> photoxin system in secondary lymphoid-organ development,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 15:217–224, 2003.

> 51.	 Pereira JP, Kelly LM, Cyster JG: Finding the right niche: B-cell

> migration in the early phases of T-dependent antibody responses,

> Int Immunol

> 22:413–419, 2010.

> 52.	 Kruetzmann S, Rosado MM, Weber H, et al.: Human immuno-

> globulin M memory B cells controlling Streptococcus pneumoniae

> infections are generated in the spleen,

> J Exp Med

> 197:939–945,

> 2003.

> 53.	 Weill JC, Weller S, Reynaud CA: Human marginal zone B cells,

> Annu Rev Immunol

> 27:267–285, 2009.

> 54.	 Baumgarth N: The double life of a B-1 cell: self-reactivity selects for

> protective effector functions,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 11:34–46, 2011.

> 55.	 Griffin DO, Holodick NE, Rothstein TL: Human B1 cells in

> umbilical cord and adult peripheral blood express the novel pheno-

> type CD20+ CD27+ CD43+ CD70,

> J Exp Med

> 208:67–80, 2011.

> 56.	 Boothby M, Rickert RC: Metabolic regulation of the immune

> humoral response,

> Immunity

> 46:743–755, 2017.

> 57.	 Kurosaki T: Molecular mechanisms in B cell antigen receptor sig-

> naling,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 9:309–318, 1997.

> 58.	 Treanor B, Depoil D, Gonzalez-Granja A, et al.: The membrane

> skeleton controls diffusion dynamics and signaling through the B

> cell receptor,

> Immunity

> 32:187–199, 2010.

> 59.	 Cherukuri A, Dykstra M, Pierce SK: Floating the raft hypothesis:

> lipid rafts play a role in immune cell activation,

> Immunity

> 14:657–

> 660, 2001.

> 60.	 Neel BG: Role of phosphatases in lymphocyte activation,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 9:405–420, 1997.

> 61.	 Westhoff CM, Whittier A, Kathol S, et al.: DNA-binding antibod-

> ies from viable motheaten mutant mice: implications for B cell tol-

> erance,

> J Immunol

> 159:3024–3033, 1997.

> 62.	 Qu CK, Yu WM, Azzarelli B, Cooper S, Broxmeyer HE, Feng GS:

> Biased suppression of hematopoiesis and multiple developmental

> defects in chimeric mice containing Shp-2 mutant cells,

> Mol Cell

> Biol

> 18:6075–6082, 1998.

> 63.	 Gregersen PK, Lee HS, Batliwalla F, Begovich AB: PTPN22: set-

> ting thresholds for autoimmunity,

> Semin Immunol

> 18:214–223,

> 2006.

> 64.	 Helgason CD, Kalberer CP, Damen JE, et al.: A dual role for Src

> homology 2 domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase (SHIP)

> in immunity: aberrant development and enhanced function of b

> lymphocytes in ship −/− mice,

> J Exp Med

> 191:781–794, 2000.

> 65.	 Bradbury LE, Kansas GS, Levy S, Evans RL, Tedder TF: The

> CD19/CD21 signal transducing complex of human B lymphocytes

> includes the target of antiproliferative antibody-1 and Leu-13 mol-

> ecules,

> J Immunol

> 149:2841–2850, 1992.

> 66.	 Carter RH, Fearon DT: CD19: lowering the threshold for antigen

> receptor stimulation of B lymphocytes,

> Science

> 256:105–107, 1992.

> 67.	 Tedder TF, Inaoki M, Sato S: The CD19-CD21 complex regulates

> signal transduction thresholds governing humoral immunity and

> autoimmunity,

> Immunity

> 6:107–118, 1997.

> 68.	 Haas KM, Hasegawa M, Steeber DA, et al.: Complement receptors

> CD21/35 link innate and protective immunity during Streptococ-

> cus pneumoniae infection by regulating IgG3 antibody responses,

> Immunity

> 17:713–723, 2002.

> 69.	 Sato S, Miller AS, Inaoki M, et al.: CD22 is both a positive and

> negative regulator of B lymphocyte antigen receptor signal trans-

> duction: altered signaling in CD22-deficient mice,

> Immunity

> 5:551–562, 1996.

> 70.	 Muller J, Nitschke L: The role of CD22 and Siglec-G in B-cell tol-

> erance and autoimmune disease,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 10:422–428,

> 2014.

> 71.	 Chan VW, Meng F, Soriano P, DeFranco AL, Lowell CA: Char-

> acterization of the B lymphocyte populations in Lyn-deficient mice

> and the role of Lyn in signal initiation and down-regulation,

> Immu-

> nity

> 7:69–81, 1997.

> 72.	 Bikah G, Carey J, Ciallella JR, Tarakhovsky A, Bondada S: CD5-

> mediated negative regulation of antigen receptor-induced growth

> signals in B-1 B cells,

> Science

> 274:1906–1909, 1996.

> 73.	 Pan C, Baumgarth N, Parnes JR: CD72-deficient mice reveal non-

> redundant roles of CD72 in B cell development and activation,

> Immunity

> 11:495–506, 1999.

> 74.	 Ujike A, Takeda K, Nakamura A, Ebihara S, Akiyama K, Takai T:

> Impaired dendritic cell maturation and increased T(H)2 responses

> in PIR-B(-/-) mice,

> Nat Immunol

> 3:542–548, 2002.

> 75.	 Karnell FG, Brezski RJ, King LB, Silverman MA, Monroe JG:

> Membrane cholesterol content accounts for developmental differ-

> ences in surface B cell receptor compartmentalization and signaling,

> J Biol Chem

> 280:25621–25628, 2005.

> 76.	 Harnett MM, Katz E, Ford CA: Differential signalling during

> B-cell maturation,

> Immunol Lett

> 98:33–44, 2005.

> 77.	 Browne EP: Regulation of B-cell responses by Toll-like receptors,

> Immunology

> 136:370–379, 2012.

> 78.	 Brown GJ, Canete PF, Wang H, et  al.: TLR7 gain-of-function

> genetic variation causes human lupus,

> Nature

> 605:349–356, 2022.

> 79.	 Mackay F, Schneider P: Cracking the BAFF code,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 9:491–502, 2009.

> 80.	 Mackay F, Woodcock SA, Lawton P, et al.: Mice transgenic for

> BAFF develop lymphocytic disorders along with autoimmune

> manifestations,

> J Exp Med

> 190:1697–1710, 1999.

> 81.	 Moisini I, Davidson A: BAFF: a local and systemic target in auto-

> immune diseases,

> Clin Exp Immunol

> 158:155–163, 2009.

> 82.	 Colombo BM, Canevali P, Magnani O, et al.: Defective expres-

> sion and function of the leukocyte associated Ig-like receptor 1 in

> B lymphocytes from systemic lupus erythematosus patients,

> PLoS

> One

> 7:e31903, 2012.

> 83.	 van Kooten C, Banchereau J: Functional role of CD40 and its

> ligand,

> Int Arch Allergy Immunol

> 113:393–399, 1997.

> 84.	 Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A: Functional diversity of helper T

> lymphocytes,

> Nature

> 383:787–793, 1996.

> 85.	 Paus D, Phan TG, Chan TD, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R: Anti-

> gen recognition strength regulates the choice between extrafollicu-

> lar plasma cell and germinal center B cell differentiation,

> J Exp Med

> 203:1081–1091, 2006.

> 86.	 Gitlin AD, Shulman Z, Nussenzweig MC: Clonal selection in the

> germinal centre by regulated proliferation and hypermutation,

> Nature

> 509:637–640, 2014.

> 87.	 Tew JG, Wu J, Qin D, Helm S, Burton GF, Szakal AK: Follicular

> dendritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory sig-

> nals to B cells,

> Immunol Rev

> 156:39–52, 1997.

> 88.	 Schroder AE, Greiner A, Seyfert C, Berek C: Differentiation of B cells

> in the nonlymphoid tissue of the synovial membrane of patients with

> rheumatoid arthritis,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 93:221–225, 1996.

> 89.	 Gommerman JL, Browning JL: Lymphotoxin/light, lymphoid

> microenvironments and autoimmune disease,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 3:642–655, 2003.

> 90.	 Kiyono H, Fukuyama S: NALT- versus Peyer’s-patch-mediated

> mucosal immunity,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 4:699–710, 2004.

> 91.	 Bernasconi NL, Traggiai E, Lanzavecchia A: Maintenance of sero-

> logical memory by polyclonal activation of human memory B cells,

> Science

> 298:2199–2202, 2002.

> 92.	 Bachmann MF, Odermatt B, Hengartner H, Zinkernagel RM:

> Induction of long-lived germinal centers associated with persisting

> antigen after viral infection,

> J Exp Med

> 183:2259–2269, 1996.

> 93.	 Muehlinghaus G, Cigliano L, Huehn S, et  al.: Regulation of

> CXCR3 and CXCR4 expression during terminal differentiation of

> memory B cells into plasma cells,

> Blood

> 105:3965–3971, 2005.

> 94.	 Shaffer AL, Lin KI, Kuo TC, et al.: Blimp-1 orchestrates plasma cell

> differentiation by extinguishing the mature B cell gene expression

> program,

> Immunity

> 17:51–62, 2002.

> 95.	 Slifka MK, Ahmed R: Long-lived plasma cells: a mechanism for

> maintaining persistent antibody production,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 10:252–258, 1998.

> 96.	 Weisel FJ, Mullett SJ, Elsner RA, et al.: Germinal center B cells

> selectively oxidize fatty acids for energy while conducting minimal

> glycolysis,

> Nat Immunol

> 21:331–342, 2020.

> 97.	 Silverman GJ, Goodyear CS: Confounding B-cell defences: lessons

> from a staphylococcal superantigen,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 6:465–475,

> 2006.

> 98.	 Hunziker L, Recher M, Macpherson AJ, et al.: Hypergammaglob-

> ulinemia and autoantibody induction mechanisms in viral infec-

> tions,

> Nat Immunol

> 4:343–349, 2003.

> 99.	 Macpherson AJ, Gatto D, Sainsbury E, Harriman GR, Hengartner

> H, Zinkernagel RM: A primitive T cell-independent mechanism

> of intestinal mucosal IgA responses to commensal bacteria,

> Science

> 288:2222–2226, 2000.

> 100.	 Litinskiy MB, Nardelli B, Hilbert DM, et al.: DCs induce CD40-

> independent immunoglobulin class switching through BLyS and

> APRIL,

> Nat Immunol

> 3:822–829, 2002.

> 101.	 Wardemann H, Yurasov S, Schaefer A, Young JW, Meffre E, Nus-

> senzweig MC: Predominant autoantibody production by early

> human B cell precursors,

> Science

> 301:1374–1377, 2003.

> 102.	 Hartley SB, Goodnow CC: Censoring of self-reactive B cells with

> a range of receptor affinities in transgenic mice expressing heavy

> chains for a lysozyme-specific antibody,

> Int Immunol

> 6:1417–1425,

> 1994.

> 103.	 Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM: Death receptors: signaling and modula-

> tion,

> Science

> 281:1305–1308, 1998.

> 104.	 Garrone P, Neidhardt EM, Garcia E, Galibert L, van Kooten C,

> Banchereau J: Fas ligation induces apoptosis of CD40-activated

> human B lymphocytes,

> J Exp Med

> 182:1265–1273, 1995.

> 105.	 Schattner EJ, Elkon KB, Yoo DH, et al.: CD40 ligation induces

> Apo-1/Fas expression on human B lymphocytes and facilitates

> apoptosis through the Apo-1/Fas pathway,

> J Exp Med

> 182:1557–

> 1565, 1995.

> 106.	 Elkon KB, Marshak-Rothstein A: B cells in systemic autoimmune

> disease: recent insights from Fas-deficient mice and men,

> Curr Opin

> Immunol

> 8:852–859, 1996.

> 107.	 Knudson CM, Korsmeyer SJ: Bcl-2 and Bax function indepen-

> dently to regulate cell death,

> Nat Genet

> 16:358–363, 1997.

> 108.	 Strasser A, Whittingham S, Vaux DL, et al.: Enforced BCL2 expres-

> sion in B-lymphoid cells prolongs antibody responses and elicits

> autoimmune disease,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 88:8661–8665,

> 1991.

> 109.	 Goodnow CC, Crosbie J, Adelstein S, et al.: Altered immunoglobu-

> lin expression and functional silencing of self-reactive B lympho-

> cytes in transgenic mice,

> Nature

> 334:676–682, 1988.

> 110.	 Cyster JG, Hartley SB, Goodnow CC: Competition for follicular

> niches excludes self-reactive cells from the recirculating B-cell rep-

> ertoire,

> Nature

> 371:389–395, 1994.

> 111.	 Cooke MP, Heath AW, Shokat KM, et al.: Immunoglobulin signal

> transduction guides the specificity of B cell-T cell interactions and is

> blocked in tolerant self-reactive B cells,

> J Exp Med

> 179:425–438, 1994.

> 112.	 Arkatkar T, Du SW, Jacobs HM, et al.: B cell-derived IL-6 initiates

> spontaneous germinal center formation during systemic autoim-

> munity,

> J Exp Med

> 214:3207–3217, 2017.

> 113.	 Mauri C: Regulation of immunity and autoimmunity by B cells,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 22:761–767, 2010.

> 114.	 Shen P, Roch T, Lampropoulou V, et al.: IL-35-producing B cells

> are critical regulators of immunity during autoimmune and infec-

> tious diseases,

> Nature

> 507:366–370, 2014.

> 115.	 Wang RX, Yu CR, Dambuza IM, et  al.: Interleukin-35 induces

> regulatory B cells that suppress autoimmune disease,

> Nat Med

> 20:633–641, 2014.

> 116.	 Grimaldi CM, Cleary J, Dagtas AS, Moussai D, Diamond B: Estro-

> gen alters thresholds for B cell apoptosis and activation,

> J Clin Invest

> 109:1625–1633, 2002.

> 117.	 Busso N, So A, Chobaz-Peclat V, et al.: Leptin signaling deficiency

> impairs humoral and cellular immune responses and attenuates

> experimental arthritis,

> J Immunol

> 168:875–882, 2002.

> 118.	 Lam QL, Wang S, Ko OK, Kincade PW, Lu L: Leptin signaling

> maintains B-cell homeostasis via induction of Bcl-2 and Cyclin D1,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 107:13812–13817, 2010.

> 119.	 Goodnow CC: Multistep pathogenesis of autoimmune disease,

> Cell

> 130:25–35, 2007.

> 120.	 Mouat IC, Goldberg E, Horwitz MS: Age-associated B cells in

> autoimmune diseases,

> Cell Mol Life Sci

> 79:402, 2022.

## References

> 1.	 Schroeder H, Wald D, Greenspan N: Immunoglobulins: structure

> and function. In Paul W, editor:

> Fundamental immunology

> , Phila-

> delphia, 2008, Lippincott-Raven, pp 125–151.

> 2.	 Janeway C, Travers P, Walport M, et al.: The structure of a typical

> antiody molecule.

> Immunobiology

> , New York, Garland, 2001, p 96.

> 3.	 Janeway C, Travers P, Walport M, et al.: Structural variation in

> immunoglobulin constant regions.

> Immunobiology

> , New York, Gar-

> land, 2001, p 142.

> 4.	 Raghavan M, Bjorkman PJ: Fc receptors and their interactions with

> immunoglobulins,

> Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol

> 12:181–220, 1996.

> 5.	 Desai DD, Harbers SO, Flores M, et al.: Fc gamma receptor IIB on

> dendritic cells enforces peripheral tolerance by inhibiting effector T

> cell responses,

> J Immunol

> 178:6217–6226, 2007.

> 6.	 Xiang Z, Cutler AJ, Brownlie RJ, et  al.: FcgammaRIIb controls

> bone marrow plasma cell persistence and apoptosis,

> Nat Immunol

> 8:419–429, 2007.

> 7.	 Johansen FE, Braathen R, Brandtzaeg P: Role of J chain in secretory

> immunoglobulin formation,

> Scand J Immunol

> 52:240–248, 2000.

> 8.	 Wiersma EJ, Collins C, Fazel S, Shulman MJ: Structural and func-

> tional analysis of J chain-deficient IgM,

> J Immunol

> 160:5979–5989,

> 1998.

> 9.	 Snapper C, Finkelman F: Immunoglobulin class switching. In Paul

> W, editor:

> Immunology

> , Philadelphia Lippincott-Raven, 1999, p

> 831.

> 10.	 Froelich CJ, Hanna WL, Poirier GG, et  al.: Granzyme B/per-

> forin-mediated apoptosis of Jurkat cells results in cleavage of

> poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase to the 89-kDa apoptotic fragment

> and less abundant 64-kDa fragment,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 227:658–665, 1996.

> 11.	 Janssen EM, Lemmens EE, Gour N, et al.: Distinct roles of cyto-

> lytic effector molecules for antigen-restricted killing by CTL

> in vivo,

> Immunol Cell Biol

> 88:761–765, 2010.

> 12.	 Simister NE, Mostov KE: An Fc receptor structurally related to

> MHC class I antigens,

> Nature

> 337:184–187, 1989.

> 13.	 Roopenian DC, Christianson GJ, Sproule TJ, et al.: The MHC class

> I-like IgG receptor controls perinatal IgG transport, IgG homeosta-

> sis, and fate of IgG-Fc-coupled drugs,

> J Immunol

> 170:3528–3533,

> 2003.

> 14.	 Macpherson AJ, McCoy KD, Johansen FE, Brandtzaeg P: The

> immune geography of IgA induction and function,

> Mucosal Immu-

> nol

> 1:11–22, 2008.

> 15.	 Woof JM, Kerr MA: The function of immunoglobulin A in immu-

> nity,

> J Pathol

> 208:270–282, 2006.

> 16.	 Yel L: Selective IgA deficiency,

> J Clin Immunol

> 30:10–16, 2010.

> 17.	 Pasquier B, Launay P, Kanamaru Y, et al.: Identification of Fcal-

> phaRI as an inhibitory receptor that controls inflammation: dual

> role of FcRgamma ITAM,

> Immunity

> 22:31–42, 2005.

> 18.	 Gould HJ, Sutton BJ: IgE in allergy and asthma today,

> Nat Rev

> Immunol

> 8:205–217, 2008.

> 19.	 Shan M, Carrillo J, Yeste A, et al.: Secreted IgD amplifies humoral

> T helper 2 cell responses by binding basophils via galectin-9 and

> CD44,

> Immunity

> 49:709–724.e8, 2018.

> 20.	 Chen K, Cerutti A: New insights into the enigma of immunoglob-

> ulin D,

> Immunol Rev

> 237:160–179, 2010.

> 21.	 Mulders-Manders CM, Simon A: Hyper-IgD syndrome/mevalon-

> ate kinase deficiency: what is new?

> Semin Immunopathol

> 37:371–

> 376, 2015.

> 22.	 Gorman JR, Alt FW: Regulation of immunoglobulin light chain

> isotype expression,

> Adv Immunol

> 69:113–181, 1998.

> 23.	 Brack C, Hirama M, Lenhard-Schuller R, Tonegawa S: A complete

> immunoglobulin gene is created by somatic recombination,

> Cell

> 15:1–14, 1978.

> 24.	 Croce CM, Shander M, Martinis J, et al.: Chromosomal location of

> the genes for human immunoglobulin heavy chains,

> Proc Natl Acad

> Sci U S A

> 76:3416–3419, 1979.

> 25.	 McBride OW, Hieter PA, Hollis GF, Swan D, Otey MC, Leder P:

> Chromosomal location of human kappa and lambda immunoglob-

> ulin light chain constant region genes,

> J Exp Med

> 155:1480–1490,

> 1982.

> 26.	 LeFrane M: Nomenclature of the human immunoglobulin genes,

> Curr Protoc Immunol

> , 2001. Appedix 1, Appendix 1P.

> 27.	 Thomas LR, Cobb RM, Oltz EM: Dynamic regulation of antigen

> receptor gene assembly,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 650:103–115, 2009.

> 28.	 Akira S, Okazaki K, Sakano H: Two pairs of recombination signals

> are sufficient to cause immunoglobulin V-(D)-J joining,

> Science

> 238:1134–1138, 1987.

> 29.	 Karsten CM, Pandey MK, Figge J, et al.: Anti-inflammatory activ-

> ity of IgG1 mediated by Fc galactosylation and association of

> FcgammaRIIB and dectin-1,

> Nat Med

> 18:1401–1406, 2012.

> 30.	 Tomana M, Schrohenloher RE, Reveille JD, Arnett FC, Koopman

> WJ: Abnormal galactosylation of serum IgG in patients with sys-

> temic lupus erythematosus and members of families with high fre-

> quency of autoimmune diseases,

> Rheumatol Int

> 12:191–194, 1992.

> 31.	 Ramirez J, Lukin K, Hagman J: From hematopoietic progenitors to

> B cells: mechanisms of lineage restriction and commitment,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 22:177–184, 2010.

> 32.	 Nutt SL, Heavey B, Rolink AG, Busslinger M: Commitment to

> the B-lymphoid lineage depends on the transcription factor Pax5,

> Nature

> 401:556–562, 1999.

> 33.	 Solvason N, Kearney JF: The human fetal omentum: a site of B cell

> generation,

> J Exp Med

> 175:397–404, 1992.

> 34.	 Igarashi H, Kouro T, Yokota T, Comp PC, Kincade PW: Age and

> stage dependency of estrogen receptor expression by lymphocyte

> precursors,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 98:15131–15136, 2001.

> 35.	 Souto-Carneiro MM, Sims GP, Girschik H, Lee J, Lipsky PE:

> Developmental changes in the human heavy chain CDR3,

> J Immu-

> nol

> 175:7425–7436, 2005.

> 36.	 Coulomb-L’Hermin A, Amara A, Schiff C, et al.: Stromal cell-

> derived factor 1 (SDF-1) and antenatal human B cell lympho-

> poiesis: expression of SDF-1 by mesothelial cells and biliary

> ductal plate epithelial cells,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 96:8585–

> 8590, 1999.

> 37.	 Gupta P, McCarthy JB, Verfaillie CM: Stromal fibroblast heparan

> sulfate is required for cytokine-mediated ex vivo maintenance of

> human long-term culture-initiating cells,

> Blood

> 87:3229–3236,

> 1996.

> 38.	 Melchers F: Checkpoints that control B cell development,

> J Clin

> Invest

> 125:2203–2210, 2015.

> 39.	 Duchosal MA: B-cell development and differentiation,

> Semin

> Hematol

> 34:2–12, 1997.

> 40.	 Herzog S, Reth M, Jumaa H: Regulation of B-cell proliferation and

> differentiation by pre-B-cell receptor signalling,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 9:195–205, 2009.

> 41.	 Ohnishi K, Melchers F: The nonimmunoglobulin portion of

> lambda5 mediates cell-autonomous pre-B cell receptor signaling,

> Nat Immunol

> 4:849–856, 2003.

> 42.	 Lortan JE, Oldfield S, Roobottom CA, MacLennan IC: Migration

> of newly-produced virgin B cells from bone marrow to secondary

> lymphoid organs,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 237:87–92, 1988.

> 43.	 Carsetti R, Rosado MM, Wardmann H: Peripheral development of

> B cells in mouse and man,

> Immunol Rev

> 197:179–191, 2004.

> 44.	 Teague BN, Pan Y, Mudd PA, et al.: Cutting edge: transitional T3

> B cells do not give rise to mature B cells, have undergone selec-

> tion, and are reduced in murine lupus,

> J Immunol

> 178:7511–7515,

> 2007.

> 45.	 Gross JA, Dillon SR, Mudri S, et al.: TACI-Ig neutralizes molecules

> critical for B cell development and autoimmune disease. impaired

> B cell maturation in mice lacking BLyS,

> Immunity

> 15:289–302,

> 2001.

> 46.	 Wirths S, Lanzavecchia A: ABCB1 transporter discriminates

> human resting naive B cells from cycling transitional and memory

> B cells,

> Eur J Immunol

> 35:3433–3441, 2005.

> 47.	 Weller S, Braun MC, Tan BK, et al.: Human blood IgM “memory” B

> cells are circulating splenic marginal zone B cells harboring a prediversi-

> fied immunoglobulin repertoire,

> Blood

> 104:3647–3654, 2004.

> 48.	 Manser T: Textbook germinal centers?

> J Immunol

> 172:3369–3375,

> 2004.

> 49.	 Kim CH: The greater chemotactic network for lymphocyte traf-

> ficking: chemokines and beyond,

> Curr Opin Hematol

> 12:298–304,

> 2005.

> 50.	 Muller G, Lipp M: Concerted action of the chemokine and lym-

> photoxin system in secondary lymphoid-organ development,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 15:217–224, 2003.

> 51.	 Pereira JP, Kelly LM, Cyster JG: Finding the right niche: B-cell

> migration in the early phases of T-dependent antibody responses,

> Int Immunol

> 22:413–419, 2010.

> 52.	 Kruetzmann S, Rosado MM, Weber H, et al.: Human immuno-

> globulin M memory B cells controlling Streptococcus pneumoniae

> infections are generated in the spleen,

> J Exp Med

> 197:939–945,

> 2003.

> 53.	 Weill JC, Weller S, Reynaud CA: Human marginal zone B cells,

> Annu Rev Immunol

> 27:267–285, 2009.

> 54.	 Baumgarth N: The double life of a B-1 cell: self-reactivity selects for

> protective effector functions,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 11:34–46, 2011.

> 55.	 Griffin DO, Holodick NE, Rothstein TL: Human B1 cells in

> umbilical cord and adult peripheral blood express the novel pheno-

> type CD20+ CD27+ CD43+ CD70,

> J Exp Med

> 208:67–80, 2011.

> 56.	 Boothby M, Rickert RC: Metabolic regulation of the immune

> humoral response,

> Immunity

> 46:743–755, 2017.

> 57.	 Kurosaki T: Molecular mechanisms in B cell antigen receptor sig-

> naling,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 9:309–318, 1997.

> 58.	 Treanor B, Depoil D, Gonzalez-Granja A, et al.: The membrane

> skeleton controls diffusion dynamics and signaling through the B

> cell receptor,

> Immunity

> 32:187–199, 2010.

> 59.	 Cherukuri A, Dykstra M, Pierce SK: Floating the raft hypothesis:

> lipid rafts play a role in immune cell activation,

> Immunity

> 14:657–

> 660, 2001.

> 60.	 Neel BG: Role of phosphatases in lymphocyte activation,

> Curr

> Opin Immunol

> 9:405–420, 1997.

> 61.	 Westhoff CM, Whittier A, Kathol S, et al.: DNA-binding antibod-

> ies from viable motheaten mutant mice: implications for B cell tol-

> erance,

> J Immunol

> 159:3024–3033, 1997.

> 62.	 Qu CK, Yu WM, Azzarelli B, Cooper S, Broxmeyer HE, Feng GS:

> Biased suppression of hematopoiesis and multiple developmental

> defects in chimeric mice containing Shp-2 mutant cells,

> Mol Cell

> Biol

> 18:6075–6082, 1998.

> 63.	 Gregersen PK, Lee HS, Batliwalla F, Begovich AB: PTPN22: set-

> ting thresholds for autoimmunity,

> Semin Immunol

> 18:214–223,

> 2006.

> 64.	 Helgason CD, Kalberer CP, Damen JE, et al.: A dual role for Src

> homology 2 domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase (SHIP)

> in immunity: aberrant development and enhanced function of b

> lymphocytes in ship −/− mice,

> J Exp Med

> 191:781–794, 2000.

> 65.	 Bradbury LE, Kansas GS, Levy S, Evans RL, Tedder TF: The

> CD19/CD21 signal transducing complex of human B lymphocytes

> includes the target of antiproliferative antibody-1 and Leu-13 mol-

> ecules,

> J Immunol

> 149:2841–2850, 1992.

> 66.	 Carter RH, Fearon DT: CD19: lowering the threshold for antigen

> receptor stimulation of B lymphocytes,

> Science

> 256:105–107, 1992.

> 67.	 Tedder TF, Inaoki M, Sato S: The CD19-CD21 complex regulates

> signal transduction thresholds governing humoral immunity and

> autoimmunity,

> Immunity

> 6:107–118, 1997.

> 68.	 Haas KM, Hasegawa M, Steeber DA, et al.: Complement receptors

> CD21/35 link innate and protective immunity during Streptococ-

> cus pneumoniae infection by regulating IgG3 antibody responses,

> Immunity

> 17:713–723, 2002.

> 69.	 Sato S, Miller AS, Inaoki M, et al.: CD22 is both a positive and

> negative regulator of B lymphocyte antigen receptor signal trans-

> duction: altered signaling in CD22-deficient mice,

> Immunity

> 5:551–562, 1996.

> 70.	 Muller J, Nitschke L: The role of CD22 and Siglec-G in B-cell tol-

> erance and autoimmune disease,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 10:422–428,

> 2014.

> 71.	 Chan VW, Meng F, Soriano P, DeFranco AL, Lowell CA: Char-

> acterization of the B lymphocyte populations in Lyn-deficient mice

> and the role of Lyn in signal initiation and down-regulation,

> Immu-

> nity

> 7:69–81, 1997.

> 72.	 Bikah G, Carey J, Ciallella JR, Tarakhovsky A, Bondada S: CD5-

> mediated negative regulation of antigen receptor-induced growth

> signals in B-1 B cells,

> Science

> 274:1906–1909, 1996.

> 73.	 Pan C, Baumgarth N, Parnes JR: CD72-deficient mice reveal non-

> redundant roles of CD72 in B cell development and activation,

> Immunity

> 11:495–506, 1999.

> 74.	 Ujike A, Takeda K, Nakamura A, Ebihara S, Akiyama K, Takai T:

> Impaired dendritic cell maturation and increased T(H)2 responses

> in PIR-B(-/-) mice,

> Nat Immunol

> 3:542–548, 2002.

> 75.	 Karnell FG, Brezski RJ, King LB, Silverman MA, Monroe JG:

> Membrane cholesterol content accounts for developmental differ-

> ences in surface B cell receptor compartmentalization and signaling,

> J Biol Chem

> 280:25621–25628, 2005.

> 76.	 Harnett MM, Katz E, Ford CA: Differential signalling during

> B-cell maturation,

> Immunol Lett

> 98:33–44, 2005.

> 77.	 Browne EP: Regulation of B-cell responses by Toll-like receptors,

> Immunology

> 136:370–379, 2012.

> 78.	 Brown GJ, Canete PF, Wang H, et  al.: TLR7 gain-of-function

> genetic variation causes human lupus,

> Nature

> 605:349–356, 2022.

> 79.	 Mackay F, Schneider P: Cracking the BAFF code,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 9:491–502, 2009.

> 80.	 Mackay F, Woodcock SA, Lawton P, et al.: Mice transgenic for

> BAFF develop lymphocytic disorders along with autoimmune

> manifestations,

> J Exp Med

> 190:1697–1710, 1999.

> 81.	 Moisini I, Davidson A: BAFF: a local and systemic target in auto-

> immune diseases,

> Clin Exp Immunol

> 158:155–163, 2009.

> 82.	 Colombo BM, Canevali P, Magnani O, et al.: Defective expres-

> sion and function of the leukocyte associated Ig-like receptor 1 in

> B lymphocytes from systemic lupus erythematosus patients,

> PLoS

> One

> 7:e31903, 2012.

> 83.	 van Kooten C, Banchereau J: Functional role of CD40 and its

> ligand,

> Int Arch Allergy Immunol

> 113:393–399, 1997.

> 84.	 Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A: Functional diversity of helper T

> lymphocytes,

> Nature

> 383:787–793, 1996.

> 85.	 Paus D, Phan TG, Chan TD, Gardam S, Basten A, Brink R: Anti-

> gen recognition strength regulates the choice between extrafollicu-

> lar plasma cell and germinal center B cell differentiation,

> J Exp Med

> 203:1081–1091, 2006.

> 86.	 Gitlin AD, Shulman Z, Nussenzweig MC: Clonal selection in the

> germinal centre by regulated proliferation and hypermutation,

> Nature

> 509:637–640, 2014.

> 87.	 Tew JG, Wu J, Qin D, Helm S, Burton GF, Szakal AK: Follicular

> dendritic cells and presentation of antigen and costimulatory sig-

> nals to B cells,

> Immunol Rev

> 156:39–52, 1997.

> 88.	 Schroder AE, Greiner A, Seyfert C, Berek C: Differentiation of B cells

> in the nonlymphoid tissue of the synovial membrane of patients with

> rheumatoid arthritis,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 93:221–225, 1996.

> 89.	 Gommerman JL, Browning JL: Lymphotoxin/light, lymphoid

> microenvironments and autoimmune disease,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 3:642–655, 2003.

> 90.	 Kiyono H, Fukuyama S: NALT- versus Peyer’s-patch-mediated

> mucosal immunity,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 4:699–710, 2004.

> 91.	 Bernasconi NL, Traggiai E, Lanzavecchia A: Maintenance of sero-

> logical memory by polyclonal activation of human memory B cells,

> Science

> 298:2199–2202, 2002.

> 92.	 Bachmann MF, Odermatt B, Hengartner H, Zinkernagel RM:

> Induction of long-lived germinal centers associated with persisting

> antigen after viral infection,

> J Exp Med

> 183:2259–2269, 1996.

> 93.	 Muehlinghaus G, Cigliano L, Huehn S, et  al.: Regulation of

> CXCR3 and CXCR4 expression during terminal differentiation of

> memory B cells into plasma cells,

> Blood

> 105:3965–3971, 2005.

> 94.	 Shaffer AL, Lin KI, Kuo TC, et al.: Blimp-1 orchestrates plasma cell

> differentiation by extinguishing the mature B cell gene expression

> program,

> Immunity

> 17:51–62, 2002.

> 95.	 Slifka MK, Ahmed R: Long-lived plasma cells: a mechanism for

> maintaining persistent antibody production,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 10:252–258, 1998.

> 96.	 Weisel FJ, Mullett SJ, Elsner RA, et al.: Germinal center B cells

> selectively oxidize fatty acids for energy while conducting minimal

> glycolysis,

> Nat Immunol

> 21:331–342, 2020.

> 97.	 Silverman GJ, Goodyear CS: Confounding B-cell defences: lessons

> from a staphylococcal superantigen,

> Nat Rev Immunol

> 6:465–475,

> 2006.

> 98.	 Hunziker L, Recher M, Macpherson AJ, et al.: Hypergammaglob-

> ulinemia and autoantibody induction mechanisms in viral infec-

> tions,

> Nat Immunol

> 4:343–349, 2003.

> 99.	 Macpherson AJ, Gatto D, Sainsbury E, Harriman GR, Hengartner

> H, Zinkernagel RM: A primitive T cell-independent mechanism

> of intestinal mucosal IgA responses to commensal bacteria,

> Science

> 288:2222–2226, 2000.

> 100.	 Litinskiy MB, Nardelli B, Hilbert DM, et al.: DCs induce CD40-

> independent immunoglobulin class switching through BLyS and

> APRIL,

> Nat Immunol

> 3:822–829, 2002.

> 101.	 Wardemann H, Yurasov S, Schaefer A, Young JW, Meffre E, Nus-

> senzweig MC: Predominant autoantibody production by early

> human B cell precursors,

> Science

> 301:1374–1377, 2003.

> 102.	 Hartley SB, Goodnow CC: Censoring of self-reactive B cells with a

> range of receptor affinities in transgenic mice expressing heavy chains

> for a lysozyme-specific antibody,

> Int Immunol

> 6:1417–1425, 1994.

> 103.	 Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM: Death receptors: signaling and modula-

> tion,

> Science

> 281:1305–1308, 1998.

> 104.	 Garrone P, Neidhardt EM, Garcia E, Galibert L, van Kooten C,

> Banchereau J: Fas ligation induces apoptosis of CD40-activated

> human B lymphocytes,

> J Exp Med

> 182:1265–1273, 1995.

> 105.	 Schattner EJ, Elkon KB, Yoo DH, et al.: CD40 ligation induces

> Apo-1/Fas expression on human B lymphocytes and facilitates

> apoptosis through the Apo-1/Fas pathway,

> J Exp Med

> 182:1557–

> 1565, 1995.

> 106.	 Elkon KB, Marshak-Rothstein A: B cells in systemic autoimmune

> disease: recent insights from Fas-deficient mice and men,

> Curr Opin

> Immunol

> 8:852–859, 1996.

> 107.	 Knudson CM, Korsmeyer SJ: Bcl-2 and Bax function indepen-

> dently to regulate cell death,

> Nat Genet

> 16:358–363, 1997.

> 108.	 Strasser A, Whittingham S, Vaux DL, et al.: Enforced BCL2 expres-

> sion in B-lymphoid cells prolongs antibody responses and elicits

> autoimmune disease,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 88:8661–8665, 1991.

> 109.	 Goodnow CC, Crosbie J, Adelstein S, et al.: Altered immunoglobu-

> lin expression and functional silencing of self-reactive B lympho-

> cytes in transgenic mice,

> Nature

> 334:676–682, 1988.

> 110.	 Cyster JG, Hartley SB, Goodnow CC: Competition for follicular

> niches excludes self-reactive cells from the recirculating B-cell rep-

> ertoire,

> Nature

> 371:389–395, 1994.

> 111.	 Cooke MP, Heath AW, Shokat KM, et al.: Immunoglobulin signal

> transduction guides the specificity of B cell-T cell interactions and is

> blocked in tolerant self-reactive B cells,

> J Exp Med

> 179:425–438, 1994.

> 112.	 Arkatkar T, Du SW, Jacobs HM, et al.: B cell-derived IL-6 initiates

> spontaneous germinal center formation during systemic autoim-

> munity,

> J Exp Med

> 214:3207–3217, 2017.

> 113.	 Mauri C: Regulation of immunity and autoimmunity by B cells,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 22:761–767, 2010.

> 114.	 Shen P, Roch T, Lampropoulou V, et al.: IL-35-producing B cells

> are critical regulators of immunity during autoimmune and infec-

> tious diseases,

> Nature

> 507:366–370, 2014.

> 115.	 Wang RX, Yu CR, Dambuza IM, et  al.: Interleukin-35 induces

> regulatory B cells that suppress autoimmune disease,

> Nat Med

> 20:633–641, 2014.

> 116.	 Grimaldi CM, Cleary J, Dagtas AS, Moussai D, Diamond B: Estro-

> gen alters thresholds for B cell apoptosis and activation,

> J Clin Invest

> 109:1625–1633, 2002.

> 117.	 Busso N, So A, Chobaz-Peclat V, et al.: Leptin signaling deficiency

> impairs humoral and cellular immune responses and attenuates

> experimental arthritis,

> J Immunol

> 168:875–882, 2002.

> 118.	 Lam QL, Wang S, Ko OK, Kincade PW, Lu L: Leptin signaling

> maintains B-cell homeostasis via induction of Bcl-2 and Cyclin D1,

> Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

> 107:13812–13817, 2010.

> 119.	 Goodnow CC: Multistep pathogenesis of autoimmune disease,

> Cell

> 130:25–35, 2007.

> 120.	 Mouat IC, Goldberg E, Horwitz MS: Age-associated B cells in

> autoimmune diseases,

> Cell Mol Life Sci

> 79:402, 2022.

> 121.	 Mouat IC, Horwitz MS: Age-associated B cells in viral infection,

> PLoS Pathog

> 18:e1010297, 2022.

> 122.	 Phalke S, Marrack P: Age (autoimmunity) associated B cells (ABCs)

> and their relatives,

> Curr Opin Immunol

> 55:75–80, 2018.

> 123.	 Rubtsova K, Rubtsov AV, Cancro MP, Marrack P: Age-associated

> B cells: a T-bet-dependent effector with roles in protective and

> pathogenic immunity,

> J Immunol

> 195:1933–1937, 2015.

> 124.	 Jenks SA, Cashman KS, Zumaquero E, et  al.: Distinct effector

> B cells induced by unregulated toll-like receptor 7 contribute to

> pathogenic responses in systemic lupus erythematosus,

> Immunity

> 49:725–739.e6, 2018.

> 125.	 Davies JM: Molecular mimicry: can epitope mimicry induce auto-

> immune disease?

> Immunol Cell Biol

> 75:113–126, 1997.

> 126.	 Munz C, Lunemann JD, Getts MT, Miller SD: Antiviral immune

> responses: triggers of or triggered by autoimmunity?

> Nat Rev Immu-

> nol

> 9:246–258, 2009.

> 127.	 McCluskey J, Farris AD, Keech CL, et al.: Determinant spread-

> ing: lessons from animal models and human disease,

> Immunol Rev

> 164:209–229, 1998.

> 128.	 Daikh DI, Finck BK, Linsley PS, Hollenbaugh D, Wofsy D: Long-

> term inhibition of murine lupus by brief simultaneous blockade of

> the B7/CD28 and CD40/gp39 costimulation pathways,

> J Immunol

> 159:3104–3108, 1997.

> 129.	 Koshy M, Berger D, Crow MK: Increased expression of CD40

> ligand on systemic lupus erythematosus lymphocytes,

> J Clin Invest

> 98:826–837, 1996.

> 130.	 Leppek K, Schott J, Reitter S, Poetz F, Hammond MC, Stoeck-

> lin G: Roquin promotes constitutive mRNA decay via a conserved

> class of stem-loop recognition motifs,

> Cell

> 153:869–881, 2013.

> 131.	 Yu D, Vinuesa CG: The elusive identity of T follicular helper cells,

> Trends Immunol

> 31:377–383, 2010.

> 132.	 Fanzo JC, Yang W, Jang SY, et al.: Loss of IRF-4-binding protein

> leads to the spontaneous development of systemic autoimmunity,

> J

> Clin Invest

> 116:703–714, 2006.

> 133.	 Chen Q, Yang W, Gupta S, et al.: IRF-4-binding protein inhib-

> its interleukin-17 and interleukin-21 production by controlling

> the activity of IRF-4 transcription factor,

> Immunity

> 29:899–

> 911, 2008.

> 134.	 Caro-Maldonado A, Wang R, Nichols AG, et al.: Metabolic repro-

> gramming is required for antibody production that is suppressed

> in anergic but exaggerated in chronically BAFF-exposed B cells,

> J

> Immunol

> 192:3626–3636, 2014.

> 135.	 Inaoki M, Sato S, Weintraub BC, Goodnow CC, Tedder TF:

> CD19-regulated signaling thresholds control peripheral toler-

> ance and autoantibody production in B lymphocytes,

> J Exp Med

> 186:1923–1931, 1997.

> 136.	 Leadbetter EA, Rifkin IR, Hohlbaum AM, Beaudette BC, Shlom-

> chik MJ, Marshak-Rothstein A: Chromatin-IgG complexes activate

> B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-like receptors,

> Nature

> 416:603–607, 2002.

> 137.	 Yin Y, Choi SC, Xu Z, et al.: Normalization of CD4+ T cell metab-

> olism reverses lupus,

> Sci Transl Med

> 7:274ra18, 2015.
