# Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Related Compounds

ROBERT B. ZURIER, SUMNER BURSTEIN,
†
AND GARY S. FIRESTEIN

KEY POINTS

> Eicosanoid biosynthesis is catalyzed by cyclooxygenases and

> lipoxygenases.

> Conversion of the endoperoxide intermediate prostaglandin H

> requires

> activity of specific terminal synthases.

> Eicosanoids and their receptors regulate inflammatory and immune

> responses.

> Synthesis of eicosanoids is modified by the administration of precursor

> fatty acids.

## Introduction

The addition of oxygen to arachidonic acid and other polyunsaturated fatty acids that are not bound to membrane phospholipids
in nearly all human cell types results in the formation of several
classes of bioactive products termed
eicosanoids
. Eicosanoids
include prostaglandins (PGs), prostacyclin (PGI), thromboxanes
(TXs), leukotrienes (LTs), and lipoxins (LXs). All of these compounds are crucial to the regulation of immunity and inflammation, among other physiologic and pathologic processes. Although
eicosanoids are derived from C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(eicosa = 20), only a small percentage of these polyenoic acids
form the eicosanoids: dihomoγ
-linolenic acid (DGLA), which
is 8,11,14-eicosatrienoic acid; arachidonic acid (AA), which is
5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid; and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA),
which is 5,8,11,14,17-EPA (
Fig. 27.1
).
Two groups of fatty acids are essential to the body: the
omega-6 series derived from linoleic acid (18:2 n-6) and the
omega-3 series derived from
α
-linolenic acid (18:3 n-3). The
n
refers to the number of carbon atoms from the methyl (omega)
end of the fatty acid chain to the first double bond (i.e., omega-3
and omega-6 designations). Using this notation,
18
refers to the
number of carbon atoms in the fatty acid. The degree of unsaturation (the number of double carbon-carbon bonds) follows the
number of carbon atoms. Fatty acids are metabolized by an alternating sequence of desaturation (removal of two hydrogen atoms)

> Deceased.

and elongation (addition of two carbon atoms). Membrane
phospholipids are the main storage site for polyunsaturated fatty
acids and are particularly rich in eicosanoid precursors, which
are located at the sn-2 position (
Fig. 27.2
). Because mammalian
cells cannot interconvert n-3 and n-6 fatty acids, the composition of membrane phospholipids is determined by exogenous
sources of fatty acids.

## Biosynthesis of Eicosanoids

### Phospholipases

The presence of phospholipase A
(PLA
) in lysosomes or bound
to cell membranes catalyzes the breaking of the sn-2 bond, facilitating the release of AA or other polyunsaturated fatty acids (see
Fig. 27.2
). The enzyme is crucial to regulation of eicosanoid synthesis because it is in the nonesterified state that the polyunsaturated precursors enter into the cascades that lead to eicosanoid
formation. Only a scant amount of oxidation at carbon 15 of AA
occurs catalytically when the fatty acid is still covalently bound as
part of a phospholipid.
A large number of PLA
isoforms have been characterized and
grouped based on primary structure, localization, and calcium ion
) requirements.
Cytosolic PLA
(cPLA
) group IV is the
(Ca
major catalyst of arachidonate release that leads to PG and LT
production. The structure of cPLA
reveals a monomeric cytosolic
protein with a molecular size of 85 kilodaltons (kDa). Lysophospholipids “left over” after the action of PLA
are direct precursors
of platelet-activating factor (PAF), a potent mediator of inflammation, which is generated by acylation (i.e., the addition of fatty
acid) in the open sn-2 position of the lysophospholipid.
Four distinct types of PLA
activities hydrolyze fatty acids
esterified at the sn-2 position. Secretory PLA
(sPLA
) has small
disulfide cross-linked proteins that require Ca
in millimolar
concentrations for optimal activity. cPLA
has larger proteins that
require Ca
in micromolar concentrations, which are AA selective and can deacylate diacylphospholipids completely, preventing
accumulation of potentially toxic lysophospholipids. Ca
-independent PLA
(iPLA
) exhibits specificity for plasmalogen substrates. Finally, PAF acetylhydrolase (PAF-PLA
) has a series of
isozymes specific for short chains.

> OMEGA-6 (n-6) FATTY ACIDS

> COOH

> CH

> Linoleic acid (18:2)

> -

> desaturase

> Delta-6

> COOH

> CH

> γ

> -Linolenic acid (18:3)

> Elongase

> Cyclooxygenase

> COOH

> CH

> Lipoxygenase

> Dihomo-

> γ

> -linolenic acid (20:3)

> Delta-5-desaturase

> COOH

> CH

> Arachidonic acid (20:4)

> Cyclooxygenase

> Lipoxygenase

> , PGI

> , TXA

> , LTB

> , LTC

> PGE

> LTA

•

*Fig. 27.1*

> Metabolic pathways of essential fatty acids. The pathways involve progressive desaturation

> alternating with elongation. Eicosanoid precursors include dihomo-

> eicosapentaenoic acid.

> LT,

> Leukotriene;

> PG,

> prostaglandin;

Under basal conditions, AA is liberated by iPLA
and then
reincorporated into cell membranes (reacylated). It is unavailable for appreciable eicosanoid biosynthesis. The acylase enzymes
competitively inhibit the cyclooxygenase (COX) isoenzymes.
After receptor activation and cell stimulation, intra-cellular Ca
levels increase and the Ca
-dependent cPLA
liberates arachidonate at a rate that exceeds the rate of reacylation, leading to arachidonate metabolism by COX isoenzymes and by lipoxygenases
(LOXs). Initial formation of PGE
seems to be due to preferential coupling among cPLA
, COX-1, and cytosolic PGH-PGE
isomerase. More intense inflammation leads to the participation
of secreted sPLA
and amplification of PGE
biosynthesis by
inducible COX-2. Thus it is an oversimplification to regard the
availability of AA as the sole rate-limiting step in cellular eicosanoid biosynthesis.
Phospholipase C (PLC) hydrolyzes the polar head group (e.g.,
inositol and choline) from phospholipids to yield diacylglycerol
(DAG) and the polar head group. Direct protein isolation and
molecular cloning studies have revealed multiple PLC isozymes in
mammalian tissues. Phosphatidylinositol-PLC occurs in cytosolic
and secreted forms and can be divided into three major classes

> OMEGA-3 (n-3) FATTY ACIDS

> COOH

> CH

> α

> -Linolenic acid (18:3)

> COOH

> CH

> 6,9,12,15-Octadecatetraenoic acid (18:4)

> COOH

> PGE

> CH

> LTC

> Stearadonic acid (20:4)

> COOH

> CH

> Eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5)

> Cyclooxygenase

> Lipoxygenase

> , TXA

> LTB

> PGE

> γ

> -linolenic acid, arachidonic acid, and

> TX,

> thromboxane.

(PLCβ
, PLCγ
, and PLCδ
) based on substrate specificity. PLC
with specificity for phosphatidylinositol and phosphorylated
phosphatidylinositol is a key component of phosphatidylinositolmediated signaling pathways. DAG is an activator of protein kinase
C (PKC), and rapid production of this lipid by phosphatidylinositol-PLC hydrolysis of the phosphorylated phosphatidylinositol
pool is a primary step in signaling. Further AA is made available
by the sequential actions of diglyceride lipase and monoglyceride
lipase.
PLC with activity on phosphatidylcholine has also been
identified. Peripheral blood monocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) exhibit greater PLA
and PLC activity than
do cells from healthy volunteers. PLA
concentrations did not
correlate with disease activity, but the greatest increases in PLC
enzyme activity were seen in cells from patients with the most
severe, persistent, proliferative disease, not in cells from patients
with the most active disease at the time the cells were studied.
In
accord with the need for balance in regulation of the inflammatory response, sPLA
, numbering nine members in humans, has
both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory actions. Thus group V
sPLA
counters the inflammatory activity of group IIA sPLA
by
regulating cysteinyl LT synthesis and promoting immune complex

> Lysophospholipid

> PLC

> Diacylglycerol

> O

> Polar Head Group

> CH

> O

> CH

> O

> P

> CH

> N

> (CH

> )

> O

> CH

> CH

> O

> O

> O

> O

> PLA

> CH

> Arachidonic

> Acid

> R

•

*Fig. 27.2*

> Arachidonic acid release from phospholipid. Phosphatidylcho-

> line, the major membrane storage site for polyunsaturated fatty acids, is

> depicted.

> PLA

> ,

> Phospholipase A

> ;

> PLC,

> phospholipase C.

clearance in a murine model of autoimmune erosive inflammatory arthritis. It is of interest that concentrations of IIA sPLA
are
far greater than those of V sPLA
in synovial fluid from patients
with RA.
In keeping with the fact that nothing in biology and
the pathogenesis of disease is simple is the observation that treatment of patients who have RA with sPLA(
)-IIA inhibitors has
only transient benefit and that sPLA(
)-IIA has activity (induction
of COX-2) independent of its enzyme activity.
Hydrolysis of phospholipids by phospholipase D (PLD)
produces phosphatidic acid (PA) and the respective polar head
groups. The capacity of cells to interconvert PA and DAG through
the action of specific cellular phosphatases and kinases (
Fig. 27.3
suggests that AA release from DAG and a variety of intra-cellular
signaling and protein-trafficking events may be regulated by PLD
activity. The targets of phosphorylation within the PLD
molecule
that are key to its regulation have been mapped. PLD may be activated after or independent of PLC activation.
The tetraenoic precursor (AA) is the most abundant of the
three eicosanoid precursor fatty acids in the cells of people who
eat usual Western-style diets. Metabolites of AA constitute the “2”
series (dienoic) PGs (two double bonds in the molecule), and the
metabolic pathway has acquired the familiar name “arachidonic
acid cascade.” Diets enriched in eicosapentaenoic or
γ
-linolenic
acid, the other eicosanoid precursors, lead to formation of different eicosanoids.
Fig. 27.4
illustrates the COX pathways of the
cascade.
Because phospholipases are involved in cell signaling and
acute inflammation, which sometimes escapes regulation and
resolution, inhibitors of sPLA
, cPLA
, and PLD are needed.
It will be important to improve the selectability of these
inhibitors.

> 2+

Ca
IP

> 3

PLC
PIP

> 2

DAG
PKC
PIP
P

> i

DAG kinase
PA hydrolase
PI
PA
Phosphatidylcholine
PLD
Choline

•

*Fig. 27.3*

> Reactions catalyzed by phospholipases C and D, illustrating

> interconversion of diacylglycerol (DAG) and phosphatidic acid (PA).

> IP

> ,

> Inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate;

> Pi,

> inorganic phosphate;

> PI,

> phosphatidylino-

> sitol;

> PIP,

> phosphatidylinositol phosphate;

> PIP

> ,

> phosphatidylinositol-

> 4,5-bisphosphonate;

> PKC,

> protein kinase C;

> PLC,

> phospholipase C;

> PLD,

> phospholipase D.

### Cyclooxygenase Pathway

The first step in the biosynthesis of prostanoids (e.g., PGs, TXs,
and PGI) is catalyzed by the bifunctional PG endoperoxide
synthase 1 isozyme (also known as
prostaglandin G/H synthase
1
[PGHS-1] and
COX-1
) and PGHS-2 (COX-2). COX is a
homodimeric enzyme that integrates into only a single leaflet of
the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane. The COX active site is a
long hydrophobic channel. Aspirin and most other nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exclude arachidonate from
the upper portion of the channel.
To form the characteristic
five-carbon ring structure (TXs contain a six-member ring), the
precursor fatty acids must have double bonds at carbons 8, 11,
and 14 (numbering from the carboxyl group). When a molecule
of oxygen is inserted across carbons 9 and 11, ring closure occurs
enzymatically across C8 and C12, creating the unstable PG
endoperoxide PGG2. Subsequent peroxidation yields PGH with
formation of the cyclopentane ring. PGH serves as the common precursor for PGs, PGI, and TXs that are formed under
the influence of terminal synthases (see
Fig. 27.4
). In addition
to the activity of phospholipases, regulation of PG synthesis also
occurs at the level of PGHS gene expression. PGHS levels are
increased by interleukin (IL)-1, platelet-derived growth factor,
and epidermal growth factor, which are compounds that increase
)
PG synthesis.
Cell membranes constitute the source of substrate AA and
the site of action of eicosanoid-forming enzymes. PG synthesis
can also occur in lipid bodies, which are non–membrane-bound,
lipid-rich cytoplasmic inclusions that develop in cells associated
with inflammation. Lipid bodies isolated from human monocytes
express PGHS activity, are reservoirs of arachidonyl phospholipids, and can function as domains of PG synthesis during an
inflammatory reaction.
PGHS, the well-known target of NSAIDs, exists in two isoforms. These isoforms are similar in terms of amino acid identities
(about 60%), catalytic properties, and substrate specificity, but
they differ in their genomic regulation.
Regulation of Cyclooxygenase-1 Expression
The gene encoding COX-1 (PTGS1) is expressed constitutively at
high levels in some cell lineages, including endothelium, monocytes, platelets, renal collecting tubules, and seminal vesicles.
Because the expression level of the enzyme does not vary greatly, it
has been difficult to study its transcriptional regulation. The gene

> Prostacyclin

> PGH

> HHT

> MDA

> TXA

•

*Fig. 27.4*

> Cyclooxygenase pathway of arachidonic acid metabolism.

> acid;

> MDA,

> malondialdehyde;

> PG,

> prostaglandin;

> TX,

has a TATA-less promoter that contains multiple start sites for transcription. The Sp1/Cis regulatory elements in the promoter bond
the Sp1 transcription factor to induce COX-1 gene expression.
In addition, COX-1 and COX-2 splice variants may function in
tissue-specific normal and pathologic processes and may represent
new targets for therapy.
The localization of COX-1 in nearly all
tissues under basal conditions suggests that its major function is
to provide eicosanoids for physiologic regulation, which is seen
clearly in platelets that do not have nuclei and cannot produce an
inducible enzyme on activation. Rather, TXs are produced constitutively so that platelet aggregation can be completed.
Regulation of Cyclooxygenase-2 Expression
The regulated formation of eicosanoids implies that cells have
an ability to amplify the rate and amount of eicosanoid synthesis. Several processes contribute to that regulation, including
the silencing of sPLA
expression by COX-2 and autoinactivation (“suicide inactivation”) of COX-2 and other oxygenases and
synthases. In addition, the COX-2 transcript contains at least 12
copies of the AUUUA RNA motif, which makes it unstable and
subject to rapid degradation. Factors that regulate COX-2 expression are specific for the physiologic processes involved. Expression of COX-2 in the macula densa in the kidney depends on

> Arachidonic Acid

> PGG

> PGD

> PGF

> PGE

> HHT,

> Hydroxyheptadeca-trienoic

> thromboxane.

luminal salt concentrations. Transcriptional activation of the
COX-2 gene by mediators of inflammation such as IL-1
β
and
TNF is likely regulated by the transcription factors nuclear factorκ
B (NFκ
B) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein. Perhaps the
most crucial of the several demonstrated regulatory sequences in
the 5
′
flanking regions of the gene for COX-2 is the activating
transcription factor/cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
response element, a site that is activated by the transcriptional
activator protein-1 (AP-1) and the cAMP regulatory binding protein. Now that quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis is
used routinely to examine gene expression, it is clear that COX-2
is constitutively expressed under basal conditions at levels too low
to be detected by Northern blot analysis.
Depending on cell
and tissue specificity, several signaling pathways (kinases, Rho,
cyclic guanosine monophosphate, and Wnt) and transcription
factors (NFκ
B, AP-1, and NF of activated T cells) are involved in
COX-2 expression.
COX-1 and COX-2 affect a balance in several physiologic and
pathologic situations. Of particular interest are their actions in the
kidney and stomach. During times of low blood volume, the kidney releases angiotensin and other factors to maintain blood pressure by systemic vasoconstriction. Angiotensin also provokes PG
synthesis in the kidney. COX-1, expressed in vessels, glomeruli,

and collecting ducts, produces vasodilating PGs, which maintain
renal plasma flow and glomerular filtration during conditions of
systemic vasoconstriction. In the antrum of the stomach, COX-1
leads to production of PGs, which increase gastric blood flow and
mucus secretion. Inhibition of COX-1 by NSAIDs prevents these
protective mechanisms and results in renal ischemia and damage, and gastric ulcers (mainly antral) in susceptible people. These
observations led to the development of NSAIDs that selectively
inhibit COX-2 and spare COX-1. AA gains access to the active
site of COX via a hydrophobic channel, and access is blocked
by insertion of an acetyl residue on serine 530 in COX-1 and
serine 516 in COX-2. The irreversibility of the interaction and
the unique expression of COX-2 in the anucleate platelet is the
reason for the clinical efficacy of low-dose aspirin. Nonacetylated
NSAIDs compete with arachidonate for the active site and can
interfere with the sustained effects of aspirin. Although the structures of COX isozymes are similar, COX-2 is characterized by a
side-pocket extension to the hydrophobic channel, which is where
the selective COX-2 inhibitors localize.
The major adverse effects of NSAIDs, gastroduodenal injury,
and impaired renal function are caused by inhibition of COX-1,
whereas promotion of myocardial infarction and stroke rests on
their ability to inhibit COX-2. Nevertheless, COX-2 also seems
to have a regulating role in renal, brain, gastrointestinal, ovarian,
and bone function. COX-2 is also expressed in endothelial cells,
and its inhibition suppresses prostacyclin synthesis by endothelial
cells.
COX-2 acts in the initiation and resolution of inflammation. Its expression increases transiently early in the course of carrageenan-induced pleurisy in rats. Later in the response, COX-2 is
expressed at even higher levels, leading to synthesis of PGD
and
its dehydration product 15-deoxyδ
12,14 PGJ
. Early expression
of COX-2 is associated with production of inflammatory PGs,
whereas the later peak results in production of PGs that suppress
inflammation.
The inflammation that occurs in COX-2 knockout mice
reminds us, as Lewis Thomas stated,
that “inflammation will take place at any cost.” Nonetheless, the search for more
selective and localized COX-2 inhibition continues. One strategy
is achieved by using the mechanism of RNA interference. Nonpathogenic
Escherichia coli
are engineered to invade tumor cells
(and perhaps could be designed to invade synovial cells) and to
generate anti-COX-2 small interfering RNA molecules (siCOX2), thereby silencing overexpressed COX-2. The involvement of
micro RNAs in COX-2 post-transcriptional regulation suggests
a possible endogenous silencing mechanism to reduce COX-2
expression.
Cyclooxygenase-3 and Other Variants
Acetaminophen, similar to NSAIDs, suppresses pain and fever.
Acetaminophen, however, is not an anti-inflammatory agent and,
despite its extensive use, its mechanism of action has not been
apparent. The finding that acetaminophen inhibits COX activity
more in canine brain homogenates than in spleen homogenates
gave rise to the concept that variants of the COX enzyme exist
that are differentially sensitive to acetaminophen. COX-3 is a
splice variant of COX-1 that retains the intron-1 gene sequence
at the messenger (m)RNA level, which encodes a 30 amino acid
sequence inserted into the N-terminal hydrophobic signal peptide
of the enzyme protein. COX-3 protein and mRNA transcripts
have been identified in human tissues and in rats. They have been
found most abundantly in the cerebral cortex and heart, although
the mechanism for conversion of COX-3 mRNA to active enzyme
is not clear.
These findings led to a search for other COX
variants. A COX-2 variant induced by diclofenac via stimulation
of the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
γ
(PPAR
γ
) (the receptor for the proresolving 15-deoxyδ
12,14
PGJ
) has been discovered. Whereas induction of COX-2 by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) results in release of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF, diclofenac-induced COX-2 leads to release
of the anti-inflammatory cytokines transforming growth factorβ
and IL-10.
Prostaglandin Synthases
Conversion of the endoperoxide intermediate PGH
to PGs
requires the activity of specific terminal synthases. Hematopoietic PGD synthase catalyzes the isomerization of PGH
to PGD
in immune and inflammatory cells. Cytosolic PGE synthase is
responsible for constitutive expression of PGE
, and microsomal
PGE synthase 1 (mPGES-1) induces PGE in response to inflammatory stimuli. At least 10 enzymes convert PG precursors into biologically active PGs, and reactive oxygen species generated during
an inflammatory response leads to expression of mPGES-1.
Suppression of PG synthase activity might be considered as an
alternative strategy that would fall between global blockade by
inhibition of COX and blockade of a single eicosanoid receptor. Increased fibrosis can be added to the well-known adverse
effects of NSAIDs, including COX-2 selective agents.
Thus
efforts have been directed at the development of drugs that
inhibit mPGES-1, rather than COX-2, thereby suppressing
PGE
production while sparing production of prostacyclin.
Because PGE
is also important to the induction of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-3 and MMP-13, suppression of mPGES-1
might counteract articular cartilage degradation in patients with
inflammatory arthritis.

## Products of the Cyclooxygenase Pathway

### Prostaglandins

The basic structure of all PGs is a 20-carbon fatty acid with a
five-membered ring at C8 through C12 (see
Fig. 27.4
,
inset
). The
term
prostaglandins
is employed widely but should be used only
to describe the oxygenation products that contain the five-membered carbon ring. A family of acidic lipids found first in human
seminal fluid, PGs were misnamed because it was thought that
they were produced in the prostate gland rather than in the seminal vesicles.
The alphabetic PG nomenclature (e.g., PGE,
PGF, and PGD) is related to the chemical architecture of the
cyclopentane ring. PGE and PGF differ only in the presence of
a ketone or hydroxyl function at C9 (see
Fig. 27.4
). These compounds are made by different enzymes (e.g., PGE
and PGD
are made by isomerases; PGF
is made by a reductase). In the
nomenclature, a subscript numeral after the letters indicates
the degree of unsaturation in the alkyl and carboxylic acid side
chains. The numeral
1
indicates the presence of a double bond at
C13–C14 (PGE
),
2
marks the presence of an additional double
bond at C5–C6 (PGE
), and
3
denotes a third double bond at
C17–C18 (PGE
).
PGs are produced on demand and generally exert their effects
on the cell of origin or nearby structures. They are not stored in
cells and are degraded rapidly in vivo by 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase (PGDH) during one passage through the lungs.
Abundant experimental evidence supports the view that PGs participate in the development of the inflammatory response. PGE
is
a central component of the inflammasome-dependent induction

of the eicosanoids that leads to loss of intravascular fluid.
PGs
are probably better, however, at potentiating the effects of other
mediators of inflammation than they are at inducing inflammation directly. PGE compounds and intermediate hydroperoxides
of AA increase pain sensitivity to bradykinin and histamine. The
effects of PGE are cumulative, depending on concentration and
time. Even small amounts of PGs, if allowed to persist at the site
of injury, may in time cause pain.
PGE
stimulates bone resorption,
and its 13,14-dihydro
derivative is nearly as potent, which is of interest because derivatives of the biologically active PGs are usually assumed to be of no
functional significance. Addition of serum to the culture medium
stimulates bone resorption, a process that is complement dependent and PG mediated. The mechanism may help explain bone
erosion in joints of patients with RA, in which complement is
activated and PGE
concentrations are high. The observation that
PGE
can stimulate bone formation
suggests that PGs physiologically participate in the coordination of bone formation and
resorption. For example, primary idiopathic hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, a familial disorder, is associated with mutations in
PGDH and subsequent impairment of PG degradation. These
patients have chronically elevated levels of PGE and exhibit digital clubbing and evidence of both increased bone formation and
resorption in their phalanges.
Many effects of IL-1 and TNF on
cells are associated with stimulation of PG production and inflammation. Cartilage explants from patients with osteoarthritis (OA)
express COX-2 (but not COX-1) and release 50 times more PGE
in culture than does cartilage from healthy subjects and 18 times
more PGE
than does normal cartilage stimulated with cytokines
plus LPS. Explants from patients with OA release IL-1
β
, whereas
normal cartilage does not express mRNA for pro-IL-1
β
or release
IL-1
β
spontaneously. It seems that in OA—and probably in RA—
upregulation of cartilage IL-1
β
and subsequent production of
PGE
leads to cartilage degradation.
Mast cells are present in large numbers in synovium from
patients early in the course of RA.
PGD
, the major PG formed
by mast cells, is also produced by eosinophils and type 2 (T helper
[Th]2) lymphocytes. PGD
induces chemotaxis of Th2 cells via
activation of the chemoattractant receptor–homologous molecule
(CRTH2) expressed on Th2 cells, and CRTH2 antagonists block
that action and reduce allergen-induced inflammation. Prostaglandin J2 (PGJ
), formed from the dehydration of PGD
, functions
as a brake on the inflammatory response. It reduces macrophage
activation, reduces nitric oxide production from stimulated cells,
and induces apoptosis in tumor cell lines. PGJ
is metabolized to
15-deoxyδ
12,14 PGJ
and
δ
12 PGJ
, which are also biologically
active.
The biologic activity of PGA, formed from loss of water
from the cyclopentane ring, is not completely clear. In vitro, however, PGA
induces apoptosis in HL-60 cells and acts through a
nuclear receptor to increase insulin sensitivity.

### Prostacyclin

PGI, discovered in 1976,
has been purified, and the complementary DNA for PGI synthase has been cloned. In addition to
a cyclopentane ring, a second ring is formed by an oxygen bridge
between carbons 6 and 9. PGI is generated from PGH
by a distinct prostacyclin synthase, a 56 kDa member of the cytochrome
P-450 superfamily of enzymes found predominantly in endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells.
Production of PGI can be
stimulated by thrombin or generated by transfer of PGH
from
platelets, or it can be stimulated by contact with activated leukocytes or by stretching of the arterial wall. PGI is a powerful
vasodilator that inhibits platelet aggregation through activation
of adenylate cyclase, which leads to an increase in intra-cellular
cAMP. It is metabolized rapidly (the half-life in plasma is less
than one circulation time) to the more stable, less biologically
active 6-keto-PGF
. The enzymatic products of its conversion—
2,3-dinor-6-keto PGF
and 6,15-di-keto-2,3-dinor PGF
—are
also chemically stable and have little biologic activity. They are the
major metabolites of prostacyclin excreted in urine, in which they
can be assayed as indicators of PGI generation.
PGI generated in the vessel wall has anti-platelet and vasodilator actions, whereas TXA
generated by platelets from the same
precursors induces platelet aggregation and vasoconstriction.
These two eicosanoids represent biologically opposite poles of a
mechanism for regulating the interaction between platelets and
the vessel wall and of formation of hemostatic plugs and intraarterial thrombi. Given the central role of platelets in inflammatory
reactions, an appropriate PGI–TX balance is important to regulation of inflammation. The balance may be altered in patients
with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, in those treated with
cyclosporine, and in patients treated with NSAIDs, especially
those treated with selective COX-2 inhibitors. Although COX-2
inhibitors reduce recurrence of colorectal adenomas, they increase
the risk for cardiovascular events.
Intravascular infusion of PGI also reduces some of the clinical changes associated with pulmonary embolism. The instability of PGI makes it cumbersome to administer therapeutically.
Nonetheless, it has been used with limited success to treat peripheral vascular disease, including Raynaud’s phenomenon. New
therapeutics for treatment of pulmonary hypertension, including
patients with sarcoidosis and systemic sclerosis, are PGI analogues
and PGI receptor antagonists.
Inhaled PGI analogues help
overcome some of the adverse events that result from intravenous
administration of these drugs.

### Thromboxanes

The endoperoxide PGH
can be converted into TXs after the
action of the enzyme TX synthase, a microsomal 60 kDa member of the cytochrome P-450 family, which is quite active in the
platelet. The gene that encodes the enzyme has been cloned. TXs
contain a six-member oxane ring instead of the cyclopentane ring
of the PGs. TX synthase converts PGH
into equal amounts of
TXA
and 12L-hydroxy-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic acid. TXA
stimulates platelet activation, contributes to intravascular aggregation of platelets, and contracts arteriolar and bronchiolar smooth
muscles. It is hydrolyzed rapidly (the half-life is 30 seconds) to
the inactive, stable, measurable product, TXB
, and its actions are
limited to the microenvironment of its release.
The extraordinary rapidity with which platelets adhere to damaged tissue, aggregate, and release potent biologically active materials suggests that the platelet is well suited to be a cellular trigger
for the inflammatory process. Efforts directed at suppression of
TX synthesis and platelet aggregation may result in limitation of
inflammatory responses, especially in coronary arteries. Inhibition
of platelet aggregation may be important to the anti-inflammatory
effects of aspirin and other NSAIDs. Long-term administration
of low doses of aspirin (40 mg/day—the lowest dose predicted
to cause total inhibition of TX formation in serum, according to
mathematic modeling) has inhibitory effects on platelet function

ex vivo that are indistinguishable from the effects caused by giving 325 mg/day of aspirin.
Aspirin acetylation of COX in platelets occurs in the portal vein, where the aspirin concentration is
high before it is metabolized in the liver, which explains why the
81-mg dose of aspirin is effective in prevention of heart attack and
stroke. Platelets lose their ability to aggregate until new platelets
are formed in about a week.
Nonetheless, the response to aspirin
can vary among individuals. Biomarker testing for TX production and assessment of aspirin efficacy—which is not done as routinely as necessary—can reduce the risks associated with aspirin
therapy.
High platelet turnover in some patients with chronic
inflammation may diminish the efficacy of aspirin, a phenomenon
called
aspirin resistance
.
Selective inhibition of TX synthase represents an approach
that may be used to suppress TXA
synthesis without depressing
prostacyclin formation. The endoperoxide steal seems to function
in vivo after administration of a TX synthase inhibitor. Antagonists of the receptors shared by endoperoxide and TXA
have been
developed, and these agents inhibit platelet aggregation in patients
who are recalcitrant to TX synthase inhibition. Novel agents targeting TX receptors and TX synthase have improved treatment of
vasculitis and cardiovascular and renal diseases.
More specific
inhibition of TX action may become possible now that TX receptors have been cloned and characterized.

### Lipoxygenase Pathways

In contrast to the COX pathway, in which stable products have
three atoms of oxygen covalently attached to AA from 2 moles
of molecular oxygen, LOXs insert a single oxygen atom into the
molecular structure of AA. Separate LOXs exist in certain cells
and have strict structural requirements for their substrates. Three
major mammalian LOXs insert their oxygen atoms into the 5, 12,
or 15 position of AA, with formation of a new double bond and
hydroperoxy group. The hydroperoxy fatty acids (hydroxyperoxy
eicosatetraenoic acid [HPETE]) can be reduced by peroxidases in
the cell to yield the corresponding hydroxy fatty acids (hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid [HETE]). The exclusive LOX product of
the human platelet is 12-HPETE, which, upon reduction of the
hydroperoxy group, yields 12-HETE. In contrast, the human
neutrophil makes predominantly 5-HPETE, but when high concentrations of AA are added, cells exhibit 15-LOX. LOXs that act
on AA are found in the cytosol fraction of cells.
The human 5-LOX gene has been isolated and characterized
and produces a 78 kDa enzyme. In myeloid cells the 5-LOX pathway leads to formation of the biologically active LTs (
Fig. 27.5
that were originally found in leukocytes and that contain three
conjugated double bonds (trienes). Cell activation leads to translocation of 5-LOX from cytosol to the nuclear membrane, where it
encounters the 18 kDa, 5-LOX–activating protein (FLAP). AA is
also translocated to FLAP for presentation to 5-LOX. In addition,
upon cell stimulation, cPLA
is activated and also associates with
the nuclear membrane, close to FLAP. Thus FLAP inhibition represents an approach to suppression of inflammation.
The ability
of macrophages and dendritic cells to respond appropriately during innate immune responses is likely regulated by 5-LOX and
12-LOX.
The unstable HPETE is the initial metabolite of each
LOX pathway. HPETE is reduced to the more stable HETE or
is converted by 5-LOX to LTA
. LTA
can be converted to LTB
(in neutrophils and macrophages) or conjugated with reduced
glutathione to form LTC
(in eosinophils, mast cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages). In contrast to LOX, which is mainly
distributed in myeloid cells, LTA
hydrolase (5,12-dihydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid), a zinc-requiring enzyme that converts LTA
to
LTB
, is widely distributed. From the DNA sequence, it was suggested that mRNA for LTA
has a short half-life, which accounts
for the properties of extremely rapid production and shutdown of
LTB
and other eicosanoid biosynthesis.
LTA
can be exported from the cell of origin and converted
into other cells by LTA
hydrolase to LTB
. This variation on the
endoperoxide steal—perhaps better called
transcellular metabolism
—also applies to conversion of LTA
to LTC
by LTC
synthase, a glutathioneS
-transferase.
Although human endothelial
cells do not produce terminal products of the 5-LOX system, they
do generate LTC
from LTA
provided by neutrophils. LTC
and
its products, LTD
and LTE
, constitute the biologic mixture previously known as slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis. LTD
and LTE
arise from LTC
after sequential removal of
γ
-glutamic
acid and glycine from LTC
. The enzyme
γ
-glutamyl transpeptidase is present in many cells as part of a complex enzymatic system
involved in glutathione biosynthesis and amino acid transport. In
many systems the major sulfidopeptide LT has been LTD
, rather
than the precursor LTC
. Removal of glycine from LTD
results
in LTE
, with concomitant loss of a significant amount of biologic
activity. The principal route of inactivation of LTB
is by omega
oxidation.

### Products of the Lipoxygenase Pathways

The biologic effects of compounds produced in the LOX pathway
indicate their importance in inflammatory diseases.
They are the
major mediators of inflammation formed by the oxygenation of AA
and are implicated as key mediators in several diseases, including
inflammatory bowel disease, systemic sclerosis, psoriasis, and RA.
5-HETE and 5-HPETE stimulate the generation of superoxide
in human neutrophils. These compounds also augment intracellular calcium levels, facilitating PKC-dependent activation of
a superoxide-generating system of neutrophils. LTB
increases
adherence of leukocytes to endothelial cells, a response that is
augmented by exposure of the endothelial cells to TNF. LTB
does not seem to have a direct vascular contractile action because
it is inactive in the hamster cheek pouch preparation and several
other microvasculature systems. In rabbit skin, administration
of LTB
with a vasodilator PG induces plasma exudation, which
suggests that LTB
may enhance vascular permeability. Increased
venule permeability does occur in response to LTC
, LTD
, and
LTE
. LTB
is a potent chemotactic factor for neutrophils and
)
is weakly chemotactic for eosinophils. LTB
and, to a lesser
extent, 5-HETE enhance migration of T lymphocytes in vitro.
Synovial cells produce 5-HETE but do not produce significant
amounts of LTB
. Nevertheless, macrophages that invade the
synovium in patients with RA generate substantial quantities of
5- and 15-lipoxygenation products, including LTB
. In addition to local signs of inflammation induced by products of the
LOX pathway, these compounds may contribute to the pain,
tenderness, and aching common in patients with RA. LTB
also
seems to serve an immunoregulatory function. It stimulates differentiation of competent CD8
T lymphocytes from precursors lacking the CD8 marker. LTB
also stimulates interferon
(IFN)-
γ
and IL-2 production by T cells and biosynthesis of IL-1
by monocytes.
LTB
and the cysteinyl LTs act as growth or differentiation factors for several cell types in vitro. These compounds also increase
proliferation of fibroblasts when PG synthesis is inhibited.
These

> 15-Lipoxygenase

> 15-HPETE

> 15-HETE

> 5-HPETE

> LTA

> Glutathione-

> Epoxide

> S

> Hydrolase

> LTB

> Dipeptidase

•

*Fig. 27.5*

> 5-Lipoxygenase pathway of arachidonic acid metabolism.

> acid;

> HPETE,

> hydroxyperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid;

findings emphasize the importance of interactions between the
COX and LOX pathways and limit efficacy of NSAID therapy in
patients with RA.
Strategies for inhibiting production or antagonizing the
actions of LTs include the development of selective LT receptor
antagonists and inhibition of the production of LT by blocking
the action of 5-LOX. Inhibition of enzymes distal in the LT cascade, such as LTA
hydrolase,
is also a promising strategy for
the development of anti-inflammatory drugs. A compound that
inhibits binding of 5-LOX to FLAP exhibits anti-inflammatory
effects in animal models. Although LOX inhibitors have not been
very useful for treatment of patients with inflammatory diseases,
development of new compounds, based on a better understanding of the molecular aspects of inhibitory activities, seems more
promising.
In addition, the existing agents may be aiming at the
wrong target. Fibroblasts do not make much LTB
, but they do

> Arachidonic Acid

> 12-Lipoxygenase

> 5-Lipoxygenase

> 12-HPETE

> 12-HETE

> +H

> +O

> 5-HETE

> -Transferase

> LTC, D, E

> LTC

> : R=

> LTD

> : R=

> LTE

> : R=

> HETE,

> Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic

> LT,

> leukotriene.

make 12-HETE, a growth factor, through a cytochrome P-450
pathway.
Cytochrome P-450 inhibitors may be more to the
therapeutic point.
LOX activities do not lead solely to production of mediators
of inflammation. DGLA is converted by 15-LOX into 15-HETE,
which is incorporated into DAG and exerts anti-inflammatory
effects partly by interfering with PKCβ
activity. A LOX product
of linoleic acid, 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid, also suppresses
inflammation and cell proliferation by a similar mechanism.
EPA is converted by LOX into 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid,
which also exhibits anti-inflammatory properties.

### Lipoxins and Resolution of Inflammation

Another large family of AA metabolites arises from the sequential
action of 5-LOXs and 15-LOXs. The addition of 15-HPETE and

15-HETE to human leukocytes results in the formation of a pair
of oxygenated products containing a unique conjugated tetraene.
One compound (LXA
) was identified as 5,6,15L-trihydroxy7,9,11,13-eicosatetraenoic acid, and the other was proven to be its
positional isomer (LXB
), 5D-14,15-trihydroxy-6,8,10,12-eicosatetraenoic acid (
Fig. 27.6
). Because both of these compounds can
arise through an interaction between LOX pathways, the trivial
name
lipoxins
(i.e., lipoxygenase interaction products) was introduced. Platelet 12-LOX can transform neutrophil LTA
to LXs.
The complete stereochemistry and multiple routes of biosynthesis
for biologically active LXA
and LXB
have been determined.
The fact that macrophages of rainbow trout generate LXs
rather than LTs or PGs as their major products of AA metabolism indicates that LXs have a long evolutionary history. LTs and
LXs can be generated in parallel in fish. In humans, the process
diverged into a two-cell system. Biosynthesis of eicosanoids by
transcellular and cell–cell interactions is recognized as an important way to generate and amplify lipid-derived mediators. LXs can
be generated within the vascular lumen during platelet–leukocyte
interactions and at mucosal surfaces via leukocyte–epithelial cell
interactions. In humans, LXs are formed in vivo during multicellular responses such as inflammation, atherosclerosis, and in
asthma. These tetraene-containing products serve as stop signals in
that they prevent leukocyte-mediated tissue injury. Acute inflammation is a primitive protective response,
and chronic inflammation involves failure of mechanisms designed to stop the acute
response. A major problem in joints of patients with RA, and of
patients with other conditions associated with chronic inflammation and tissue injury, is that inflammation fails to resolve. LXs
and aspirin-induced 15-epilipoxins are endogenous components
of events governing resolution of inflammation. Aspirin acetylation of COX-2 in endothelial cells suppresses PG synthesis but
leads to generation of 15R-HETE from AA, which is transformed
to 15-epilipoxin by leukocytes in a transcellular biosynthetic
route involving vascular endothelial cells or epithelial cells. These
15-epilipoxins exhibit anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative
actions in  vitro and in  vivo. Stable analogues of LXA
and of
aspirin-triggered LX (ATL) have also suppressed inflammation in
animal models. In addition, acting as antagonists at the receptor
CysLT1, ATL analogues counteract the inflammatory actions of
cysteinyl LTs.
These observations may lead to new anti-inflammatory drugs. For example, induction by IFN of particular genes
is important to the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). A stable synthetic analogue of LXA
suppressed several IFN-induced genes and reduced kidney damage in a murine
model of immune-mediated nephritis.
LXs block human polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis
but stimulate monocyte chemotaxis and adherence. Monocytes do
not release mediators of inflammation in response to LXs, however, and LXs are converted rapidly by monocytes to inactive compounds. This selective effect on chemotaxis suggests that LXs play
a role in wound healing. LXA
antagonizes LTD
-induced vasoconstriction in vivo and blocks binding of LTD
to its receptors
on mesangial cells. LXA
suppresses LTB
-induced plasma leakage and leukocyte migration and blocks LTB
-induced neutrophil
inositol triphosphate generation and calcium mobilization but
not superoxide anion generation. Conversely, LXA
activates PKC
and is more potent in this regard than DAG and AA. LXA
seems
to be specific for the
γ
subspecies of PKC. These results indicate
that LXs regulate the actions of vasoconstrictor LTs and suggest
that LXA
may be an important modulator of intra-cellular signal
transduction.

> COOH

> Arachidonic Acid

> CH

> 15-Lipoxygenase

> COOH

> CH

> OOH

> 5-Lipoxygenase

> COOH

> CH

> OH

> O

> OOH

> COOH

> CH

> OH

> COOH

> O

> CH

> OH

> OH

> OH

> HO

> COOH

> COOH

> OH

> CH

> CH

> OH

> OH

> Lipoxin A

> Lipoxin B

•

*Fig. 27.6*

> Lipoxin biosynthesis. The lipoxins result from the sequential

> action of 15-lipoxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase on arachidonic acid.

It was long thought that resolution of inflammation was a passive process. Contrary to this belief, the inflammatory response
does not dissipate but is mediated actively by products of COX
and LOX and acetylation of these enzymes.
The discovery
that omega-6 and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are also
substrates for enzymatic oxygenation reactions that produce
lipid mediators with potent anti-inflammatory and proresolution actions has advanced our understanding of the inflammatory response. In addition to LXs, entire spectra of specialized
proresolving mediators (SPMs) have been uncovered. These
SPMs include resolvins, protectins, and maresins.
Like LXs,
resolvins are formed via specific transcellular biosynthetic pathways from both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids. EPA-derived (E series)
cellular interaction products formed in resolving exudates have
been termed
resolvins
(RvE1, RvE2, and RvE3). The omega-3
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can be catalyzed via the 15-LOX
pathway to dihydroxy products (D series resolvins D1–D5) that

also stimulate resolution of inflammation and enhance innate host
defense mechanisms. LXs and resolvins act as endogenous receptor agonists at low concentrations (pM to nM) and at specific G
protein–coupled membrane spanning receptors to actively downregulate inflammatory events and to stimulate resolution of an
inflammatory exudate. A single cell type can also form oxygenated
lipid mediators with counterregulatory actions. DHA can also be
catalyzed via the 15-LOX pathway to a dihydroxy product termed
protectin D1
, which can protect against tissue damage and activate
resolution of inflammation. In a second single oxygenation route,
a lipid mediator termed
maresin
(macrophage mediators in resolving inflammation) is formed via the action of human 12-LOX.
The maresin biosynthetic pathway is activated in macrophages
during phagocytosis. Maresin 1 reduces neutrophil migration
and increases macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, thereby
exhibiting the hallmarks of SPMs. It now seems clear that the failure of resolution programs contributes to progression of diseases
characterized by chronic inflammation.

### Isoeicosanoids

Isoeicosanoids, which are isomers of enzymatically derived eicosanoids, are derived from the free radical–mediated peroxidation
auto-oxidation of both omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids.
Iso
eicosanoids include members of the F, D, and E isoprostanes, isothromboxanes, and isoleukotrienes. Analysis of the isoprostanes
indicates that they reflect lipid peroxidation in vivo and are therefore used as markers of oxidative stress. One F-type isoprostane,
isoprostane F
III (formerly 8-isoprostaglandin F
), has been
studied in detail because of its biologic activity in vitro. Isoprostane F
III (
Fig. 27.7
) is a potent vasoconstrictor and may function as a mitogen, with actions that are blocked by TX receptor
antagonists. Although isoprostanes may act as ligands at TX or PG
receptors (e.g., 8,12-isoprostane F
III activates the PGF
receptor), they also activate specific isoprostane receptors.
Isoprostanes
What all isoprostanes have in common, and what distinguishes
them from the PGs, is the fact that the top (
α
) and the bottom
(
ω
) side chains are always syn—that is, crowded together on the
same face of the cyclopentane ring. The minimal requirement for
generation of an isoprostane is a polyunsaturated fatty acid with
three contiguous methylene-interrupted double bonds, a requirement met by dozens of naturally occurring polyunsaturated fatty
acids. Brain tissue contains particularly high levels of fatty acids

> Arachidonic Acid

> HO

> COOH

> HO

> OH

> III

•

*Fig. 27.7*

> Isoprostane F

> structures.

> Jagged lines

formed from DHA (C22:6 n-3). By the same peroxidation process
undergone by AA, DHA in nerve cell membranes is converted to
several neuroprostanes. Of these, F4-neuroprostane is a biomarker
for several neurodegenerative diseases. A similar mechanism in
plants yields phytoprostanes from
α
-linolenic acid. In contrast to
conventional, enzymatically derived PGs that are formed intracellularly and released immediately, isoprostanes are formed in the
cell membrane, cleaved by phospholipases, circulate in plasma,
and are excreted in urine. As stable end products of lipid peroxidation, endogenously formed isoprostanes are useful markers of
oxidative stress and independent risk markers for coronary artery
disease. They are increased in several diseases, including acute
respiratory distress syndrome, in which polymorphonuclear leukocytes generate reactive oxygen species that damage pulmonary
epithelium. The immune cells in inflamed tissues are exposed to
reactive oxygen intermediates produced by neutrophils and other
phagocytic cells. Oxidants are also generated as mediators in intracellular signaling pathways by cytokines such as IL-1
β
and TNF.
Isoprostanes are important to, and are biomarkers for, inflammatory conditions such as vasculitis and RA, and they are assayed in
biologic fluids and tissues. Because isoprostanes are released preformed, their production is not blocked by NSAIDs, which suppress metabolism of free AA. It is possible that inflammation that
is unresponsive to NSAIDs may yield to inhibition of isoprostanes.
In keeping with the notion of eicosanoids as regulators, however,
some isoprostanes suppress release of mediators of inflammation
from macrophages, and a phytoprostane (E1-phytoprostane) signals through PPAR
γ
and NFκ
B to suppress IL-12 production by
activated dendritic cells and to reduce cytokine production by Th1
and Th2 cells.

### Endocannabinoids

Groups of naturally occurring members of the eicosanoid superfamily that can activate cannabinoid receptors and are derivatives
of long-chain fatty acids have been referred to as
endocannabinoids
. They are not stored in cells. Rather, they are synthesized
rapidly in the manner of PGs and LTs from lipid precursors and
are released from—among other cells—cells of the immune system during immune/inflammatory responses. They can then
activate cannabinoid receptors on the same or adjacent cells and
are metabolized rapidly by the specific serine hydrolase, fatty
acid amide hydrolase (FAAH), or by monoglyceride lipase or
N
-acetylethanolamine. Thus inhibition of FAAH offers a strategy
for treatment of chronic inflammatory pain.
One of the most

> COOH

> OH

> HO

> COOH

> HO

> IV

> indicate that stereochemistry is uncertain.

important endocannabinoids is anandamide (from the Sanskrit
word for “bliss”), the amide conjugate of AA and ethanolamine
(arachidonoyl ethanolamide;
Fig. 27.8
). Anandamides and other
endocannabinoids, such as 2-arachidonylglycerol and virodamine,
are involved in a wide range of regulatory functions, including
pain perception and modulation of immune responses, actions
mediated via cannabinoid 1 (CB1) and CB2 receptor subtypes,
resulting in activation of G proteins of the G(i/o) family. Of
particular relevance to joint tissue injury is the capacity of anandamide to suppress TNF-induced NFκ
B activation by direct
inhibition of I
κ
B kinase, an action that is independent of CB1 or
CB2 activation.
Acid congeners of anandamides are lipoamino acids (elmiric
acids) that exist as endogenous substances, regulate tissue levels of
anandamide, and exhibit anti-inflammatory effects and the capacity to assist resolution of inflammation. One such compound,
N
-arachidonylglycine (NAgly), is found in many tissues at higher
concentrations than anandamide. It has analgesic actions similar
to those reported for anandamide but does not exhibit psychotropic action. A library of elmiric acids (n-3 and n-6) has been synthesized. Several of these compounds exhibit anti-inflammatory
activity, likely in part by increasing production of PGJ
, and they
also modulate immune responses.
Discovery of naturally occurring and synthetic analogues and
metabolites of anandamide suggest that a family of such biologically active substances exists. The polyunsaturated amides dihomoγ
-linolenoyl (20:3 n-6) and adrenoyl (22:4 n-6) ethanolamides
have been found in the mammalian brain.
N-3 fatty acid ethanolamides also exist in mammalian tissues. That anandamide can
enhance its own synthesis in macrophages suggests the presence
of a rapid response to counter excessive inflammatory or immune
responses. Anandamide is converted by COX-2 (but not by COX-1)
into PGE
or PGF
ethanolamide directly, without going through
free AA.
These novel PGs (“prostamides”) are pharmacologically
active.
Because anandamide is a substrate for COX-2, inhibitors
of COX-2 may reduce anandamide metabolism, with a subsequent
increase in concentration of the anandamide. A combination of
anandamide with NSAIDs reduces gastric damage and produces
synergistic analgesia in experimental models.
NAgly, a naturally
occurring lipoamino acid, is also a substrate for COX-2, giving rise
to amino acid conjugates of the PGs.

## Eicosanoid Receptors

For many years, it was thought that the lipophilic eicosanoids—in
contrast to the peptide molecules for which receptors were characterized routinely—simply “diffused” into cell membranes or were
carried in by a binding protein. The isolation and cloning of eicosanoid receptors changed that thinking.

### Prostaglandin Receptors

PGs exert most of their actions through G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs). Receptors for the COX products are designated P

> CONHCH

> CH

> OH

> Anandamide

•

*Fig. 27.8*

> Chemical structure of anandamide (arachidonoyl ethanol-

> amide).

receptors, depending on the prostanoid that has the most affinity
for them. These receptors include the PGD receptors (DP); four
subtypes of the PGE receptor (EP1 through EP4); the PGF receptor (FP); the PGI
receptor (IP); and the TX receptor (TP). The IP,
DP, EP2, and EP4 receptors mediate increases in cellular cAMP,
whereas the TP, FP, and EP1 receptors induce calcium mobilization. EP2, EP4, and IP regulate macrophage cytokine production
in a similar manner. As might be expected, signaling through these
receptors is more complicated. Studies designed to understand
PGE
signaling suggest the involvement of phosphatidylinositol3-kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and Wnt
pathways in EP2R/EP4R regulation of cell growth, migration, and
apoptosis.
PGE
is the most abundant of the major eicosanoids
in the joint space of patients with RA. The molecular mechanisms
whereby PGE
actions are mediated by each EP subtype have been
explained using mice deficient in each subtype.
Identification of
PGD
as the ligand for the DP2 receptor led to the development
of DP2 receptor antagonists for treatment of asthma and airway
inflammation.
The modification of immune cell and surrounding cell functions by prostanoids during immune or inflammatory responses
is influenced by the different repertoire of PG receptors expressed
on these cells. Mice deficient in each EP receptor subtype have
been generated, and highly selective agonists for these receptors
have been developed. As noted, PGE can suppress or induce bone
formation.
EP2 and EP4 knockout mice exhibit inflammationinduced bone resorption and impaired osteoclastogenesis. The
receptor mediating PGE-induced bone formation is unknown,
although it has been proposed that EP2R and EP4R mediate the
anabolic effects of PGE
on bone. In animal models, acute inflammation and pain are completely absent in IP-deficient mice. The
profile of PG formation changes as the inflammatory response
evolves to a more chronic state, so other receptors are probably
involved. It is unlikely that blockade of one receptor will completely block an inflammatory response. More encouraging is the
fact that PGs participate in allodynia, a pain response to a usually
nonpainful stimulus. Knowing the contribution of P receptors to
allodynia should lead to better treatment of neuropathic pain and
myofascial pain syndromes such as fibromyalgia.
Stimulation of TX/endoperoxide receptors (TP) elicits platelet aggregation and contraction of vascular smooth muscle and
promotes expression of adhesion molecules with subsequent
movement of monocytes/macrophages from the circulation to tissue. Thus TP antagonists reduce vascular inflammation, are antithrombotic, and maintain vasodilation, actions that mark them
as potential agents for treatment of conditions characterized by
chronic inflammation.
The availability of cloned P receptors should assist in the development of more effective receptor-active compounds. The PGI
analogue iloprost is useful for treatment of peripheral vascular
disease and pulmonary hypertension. Although iloprost binds to
IP with high affinity, it also binds to EP1 and EP3. It may be
that targeting activation, blockade, or both of a single P receptor or a specific set of P receptors will provide advantages compared with compounds that work “upstream,” such as the COX-2
inhibitors or traditional NSAIDs. For example, it is clear that E
prostaglandins are the most important of the endogenous eicosanoids for modulation of the function and mucosal integrity of
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Protection by PGE
against acid
reflux esophagitis and against ethanol- and indomethacin-induced
gastric mucosa injury is mimicked by EP1 agonists and attenuated
by an EP1 antagonist, whereas EP4 antagonism does not affect the

integrity of GI mucosa. In addition, PGE
does not exhibit gastric cytoprotection in EP1 knockout mice. In the small intestine,
the protective effect of PGE
on indomethacin-induced damage is
mimicked by both EP3 and EP4 agonists.
Further evidence of the importance of eicosanoids in immune
cell function and regulation of immune responses derives from
experiments with mice deficient in PG receptors, which indicate that PGE
assists and amplifies IL-12-mediated Th1 cell
differentiation and IL-23-mediated Th17 cell expansion. These
PGE
actions and those of PGD
and PGI
—also discovered
using receptor-deficient mice—contribute to the development of
immune diseases.
Mice lacking the PGF
receptor are protected
against bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis,
a finding with
implications for treatment of systemic sclerosis.
The implications for therapy derived from this new knowledge
are clear and exciting, but prostanoid analogues with selective
binding properties need to be developed. Some progress has been
made, and it seems that deletion of P receptors, with the exception
of EP4, is not associated with serious problems of fetal development or physiologic function in animals.

### Leukotriene Receptors

Surface receptors for LTB
, denoted BLT1 and BLT2 (LTB
R-1
and LTB
R-2), and for the cysteinyl (cys)LTs, produced by cells
of the innate immune system, including Th2 lymphocytes, also
exert their actions through transmembrane-spanning GPCRs.
High-affinity LTB
receptors transduce chemotaxis and adhesion
responses, whereas low-affinity receptors are responsible for the
secretion of granule contents and superoxide generation. Recognition that cysLTs are important to the pathogenesis of diseases
characterized by acute and chronic inflammation prompted the
development of selective cysLT receptor antagonists.
BLT2
knockout mice express normal levels of BLT1 but are protected
from development of disease in the K/BxN model of inflammatory arthritis.
The COX-1-derived ligand 12(S)-hydroxyheptadeca-5Z,8E,10E-trienoic acid, which is produced during
thromboxane synthesis, is an endogenous high-affinity ligand for
BLT2 (now called BLT2/HHTR), another example of a connection between the LOX and COX pathways. LTB
in particular
among the LTs is involved in the development of atherosclerosis,
which has emerged as a major concern for patients with inflammatory arthritis and lupus.
The receptor for cysLTs includes two subtypes: CysLT
and
CysLT
. The molecular structure of CysLT
has been constructed.
CysLT
contains 336 amino acid residues, and the gene encoding
the receptor is located on the X chromosome. CysLT
contains
345 amino acids with 40% sequence identity to CysLT
. CysLT
mediates calcium mobilization and inhibition of adenylate cyclase,
whereas CysLT
mediates calcium mobilization and increased
cAMP concentrations. The preferred ligands for CysLT
are LTD
> LTC
> LTE
. CysLT
binds LTC
and LTD
equally, whereas
LTE
exhibits low affinity for the receptor. Both receptors have
wide tissue and cellular distribution, including a presence in cells
that participate in immune responses.
Most actions of the cysLTs
are mediated by CysLT
. More than a dozen chemically distinct,
specific, and selective antagonist drugs that block the binding of
LT to CysLT
have been identified. Clinically, these compounds
have been used mainly in the treatment of asthma. Development
of selective LTB
receptor antagonists, which are useful in preclinical models, may lead to their use in inflammatory disease.
A challenge to the design of “anti-receptor therapy” is the genetic
variation in GPCRs that can be associated with disease.
Adding
to the complexity is the fact that variants may result in altered
predisposition to disease, rather than manifestation of the disease. Each variant provides an opportunity to understand receptor
functions such as recycling or desensitization, thus enhancing the
potential for the development of therapy.

### Lipoxin Receptors

LXs can act at their own specific receptors for LXA
and LXB
,
and LXA
can interact with a subtype of LTD
receptors. LXs can
also act at intra-cellular targets within their cell of origin or after
uptake by another cell. The seven-transmembrane-spanning, G
protein–coupled LXA
receptor named ALX/FPR2 (Kd
∼
0.7 nM)
has been cloned and characterized. Signaling involves a novel polyisoprenyl-phosphate pathway that regulates phospholipase D.
LX
actions are cell-type specific. The monocyte and neutrophil LXA
receptors are identical at the DNA sequence level, but they evoke
different responses, and the LXA
receptor on endothelial cells
seems to be a structurally distinct form. LXA
also binds to the
human orphan receptor GPR32, a member of the chemoattractant
receptor family. Like LXA
, 15-epi-LXA
is an anti-inflammatory
SPM that binds and activates ALX/FPR2 (Kd
∼
2 nM). Lipoxin B
(LXB
) and aspirin-triggered 15-epi LXB
also have anti-inflammatory actions by oral administration and topical application. Stereoselective actions of these compounds indicate they have their
own yet-to-be-identified receptors. The resolvins, derived from
omega-3 fatty acids, activate the receptors GPR32 and ChemR23.

### Nuclear Receptors

Nuclear receptors are a superfamily of ligand-regulated transcription factors that interact with other transcription factors and with
coregulators that either enhance (coactivators) or inhibit (corepressors) transcription. The major nuclear receptors involved
in regulation of inflammation are the glucocorticoid receptors
(GRs), peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors, liver X receptors (LXRs), and the orphan receptor nuclear receptor–related 1
protein (Nurr1). Other members of the nuclear receptor family
that contribute to regulation of inflammation include estrogen
receptors, vitamin D receptors, and retinoic acid receptors. The
clinical efficacy of glucocorticoids is well known, but knowledge
of their mechanisms of action has been slow to emerge. The ability of GRs to repress inflammatory responses is due in part to
interference with other signal-dependent transcription factors and
disruption of activator/coactivator complexes.
PPARs are members of the nuclear receptor family of transcription factors, a large and diverse group of proteins that mediate ligand-dependent transcriptional activation and repression.
PPARs were first cloned as nuclear receptors that mediate the
effects on gene transcription of synthetic compounds called
peroxisome proliferators
. Several mechanisms account for the antiinflammatory action of PPAR
γ
, including inhibition of NFκ
B;
inhibition of transcription of genes encoding for IL-1
β
, IL-12,
MMP-9, and chemokines; and promotion of expression of antiinflammatory mediators, including IL-10 and LXR. PPAR
γ
can be modulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs).
Thus regulation of PTMs may be a better approach to disease
therapy than the existing PPAR
γ
activators.
Interest in PPARs
increased dramatically when they were activated by medically
relevant compounds, including NSAIDs and PGD
and its
metabolite 15-deoxyδ
12,14 PGJ
.
Much of the information

available on the potential role of PPARs in inflammation relates
to PPAR
γ
. One PPAR
α
agonist, palmitoyl ethanolamide, shows
promise for relief of chronic pain.
PPAR
α
is expressed mainly
in tissues that have a high fatty acid catabolism, including the
liver and the immune system. LTB
is an activator and natural ligand of PPAR
α
. Activation of PPAR
α
results in induction
of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation pathways that degrade
fatty acids and derivatives, including LTB
. Thus a feedback
mechanism that controls inflammation is established. Mechanisms for the anti-inflammatory actions of PPAR
β
/
δ
include
induction of an anti-inflammatory co-repressor protein, inhibition of NFκ
B, and induction of anti-inflammatory mediators.
Experiments with PPAR knockout mice indicate that PPAR
α
suppresses LTB
-induced inflammation. PPAR agonists that target PPAR action more selectively are being developed.
Overexpression of Nurr receptors reduces inflammatory cytokine
expression, and mutations in the
Nurr1
gene are associated with
diminished counter-regulation of inflammation.
Several kinases that facilitate co-repressor turnover have been
identified. These kinases represent important pharmacologic
targets because their inhibition should block gene expression of
inflammatory mediators while bypassing the clinically significant adverse events associated with direct targeting of the nuclear
receptors. For example, cartilage matrix degradation is prevented
by inhibition of a cyclin-dependent kinase.

## Platelet-Activating Factor

PAF (1-0-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) is a potent
mediator of inflammation that causes neutrophil activation,
increased vascular permeability, vasodilation, and bronchoconstriction, in addition to platelet activation. PAF is formed by a
smaller number of cell types than the eicosanoids, mainly leukocytes, platelets, and endothelial cells. Because of the extensive distribution of these cells, however, the actions of PAF can manifest in
virtually every organ system. In contrast to the two long-chain acyl
groups present in phosphatidylcholine, PAF contains a long-chain
alkyl group joined to the glycerol backbone in an ether linkage at
position 1 and an acetyl group at position 2 (
Fig. 27.9
). PAF represents a family of phospholipids (PAF-like lipids) because the alkyl
group at position 1 can vary in length from 12 to 18 carbons. PAF,
similar to the eicosanoids, is not stored in cells. Rather, it is synthesized when cells are stimulated, at which time the composition
of the alkyl group may change. The immediate effects of PAF are
mediated through a cell surface GPCR, PAFR. PAFR is coupled to
Gi, Gq, and G12/13. Activation of PAFR results in inhibition of
cAMP, mobilization of calcium, and activation of MAPKs, whereas
long-term responses depend on intra-cellular receptor activation.
Despite the potent inflammatory effects of PAF, its inhibition
in animal models does not lead to marked suppression of inflammatory responses. PAF acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH) circulates in
blood in association with lipoproteins, is found in atherosclerotic
lesions, and hydrolyzes PAF, and was thus considered to have antiinflammatory properties and to be a marker for cardiovascular
disease. At the same time, however, PAF-AH also generates compounds that have pro-inflammatory activity, which likely explains
why, in three clinical trials, a PAF-AH inhibitor failed to influence
C-reactive protein levels, coronary atherosclerosis, or time to cardiovascular death.
Nonetheless, targeting PAF metabolism,
signaling, and the PAF receptor, as monotherapy or with other
agents, is a promising approach to suppression of inflammation
and carcinogenesis.

> O

> O

> O

> O

> H

> C

> N

> O

> P

> O

> O

•

*Fig. 27.9*

> Chemical structure of platelet-activating factor.

## Eicosanoids as Regulators of Inflammation and Immune Responses

In addition to their well-known actions as mediators of inflammation, the stable PGs PGE
and PGI
have anti-inflammatory,
inflammatory, and immunomodulatory actions.
As noted,
PGJ, LXs, and an array of eicosanoids act as brakes to protect
against runaway inflammatory responses. Even LTB
is capable of
modulating inflammation and immune responses.
The observations that PGE
inhibits platelet aggregation and that it suppresses
acute and chronic inflammation and joint tissue injury in animal
models
led to the notion that COX products of AA metabolism
might have anti-inflammatory activity. As it became clearer that
NSAIDs have anti-inflammatory effects other than interference
with COX production and subsequent PG inhibition,
consideration was given to the potential protective effects of PGs.
PGE
has remained an orphan among the eicosanoids, mainly
because of a long-held notion that not enough of it is made by
human cells to be of use and that its biologic effects are no different from the effects of PGE
and PGI
. Contrary to popular belief,
PGE
is found in physiologically important amounts in humans.
Lost in the vast literature on the “AA cascade” are the early observations of Bygdeman and Samuelsson,
who found (using bioassay) that the concentration of PGE
in human seminal plasma (16
μ
g/mL) was higher than that of PGE
(13
μ
g/mL), PGE
(3
μ
g/
mL), PGF
(2
μ
g/mL), and PGF
(12
μ
g/mL). One group
found PGE
to be the sole PGE in human thymus. PG immunoassays usually do not distinguish between PGE
and PGE
.
To identify PGE
, it must first be separated from PGE
by thinlayer or high-performance liquid chromatography. When such
methods have been used, PGE
has been identified consistently
in platelets, leukocytes, macrophages, the vas deferens, oviducts,
the uterus, the heart, and the skin.
Evidence from in vitro and
in vivo experiments indicates that PGs, notably PGE compounds,
can suppress diverse effector systems of inflammation. PGE can
enhance and diminish cellular and humoral immune responses,
observations that reinforce a view of these compounds as regulators of cell function. These actions of eicosanoids depend on the
stimulus to inflammation, the predominant eicosanoid produced
at a particular time in the host response, and the profile of eicosanoid-receptor expression.
The “2” series prostaglandins (i.e., E2, D2, and I2) also regulate T cell function and immune responses. PGE
reduces production of several inflammatory cytokines, including TNF, IFNγ
,
and IL-12, and reduces IFNα
production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) from patients with SLE. PGE
-treated PDCs
from patients with SLE also induce CD4
T cell proliferation and
skew cytokine production toward a Th2 profile.
Another example of an endogenous link between the COX and LOX pathways
is provided by the observation that PGE
preserves resolution of

inflammation in the murine collagen–induced arthritis model by
increasing production of the proresolving LXA
.

## Modulation of Eicosanoid Synthesis by Administration of Precursor Fatty Acids

The relationship between essential fatty acids and PGs was discovered simultaneously and independently by two groups.
Both groups reported that AA was converted to PGE
, and shortly
thereafter they showed that PGE
is formed from DGLA.
Attempts to modify eicosanoid production have been directed
at providing fatty acids other than AA as substrates for oxygenation enzymes in an effort to generate a unique eicosanoid profile with immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory effects.
The fatty acids themselves, by virtue of their incorporation into
signal-transduction elements, also have effects independent of the
eicosanoid effects on cells involved in inflammation and immune
responses.
Experiments directed at suppression of TX synthesis, enhancement of PGI production, and inhibition of platelet aggregation
have been done in an effort to limit inflammatory responses. EPA
is not found in appreciable amounts in cells from people who eat
a Western-style diet. Fish oil lipids, which are rich in EPA (20:5
n-3), inhibit formation of COX products (e.g., TXA
and PGE
)
derived from AA, and the newly formed TXA
has much less ability than TXA
to constrict vessels and aggregate platelets. Production of PGI
(prostacyclin) by endothelial cells is not reduced
appreciably by increased EPA content, and the physiologic activity
of newly synthesized PGI
is added to that of PGI
. Administration of fish oil to humans leads to reduced production of LTB
by
means of 5-LOX in stimulated neutrophils and monocytes and
induces EPA-derived LTB
, which is far less biologically active
than LTB
. Fish oil also reduces production of IL-1
β
, TNF, and
PAF by activated blood monocytes. In randomized controlled trials of administration of fish oil to patients with RA, tender joint
counts and duration of morning stiffness were reduced and use
of NSAIDs decreased. Fish oil treatment of patients with early
RA (<12 months) reduces the triple therapy conventional disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug failure rate and increases the
American College of Rheumatology remission rate.
Because
NSAIDs confer an increased risk for cardiovascular disease and
increased mortality from cardiovascular disease occurs in patients
with RA, an added benefit of fish oil for patients with RA may
be reduced risk of cardiovascular disease directly and by virtue of
less use of NSAIDs.
Another potential benefit of an increase
in dietary omega-3 fatty acids might be greater formation, from
EPA and DHA, of resolvins, protectins, and maresins, all of which
participate in resolution of inflammation.
The other “alternative” eicosanoid precursor fatty acid, DGLA
(20:3 n-6), is also increased by administration of certain plant
seed oils, notably oils extracted from the seeds of
Oenothera biennis
(evening primrose) and
Boragio officinalis
(borage), which
contain relatively large amounts of GLA. GLA is converted to
DGLA, the immediate precursor of PGE
, an eicosanoid with
known anti-inflammatory and immunoregulating properties.
Administration of GLA to volunteers and patients with RA results
in increased production of PGE
and reduced production of the
inflammatory eicosanoids PGE
, LTB
, and LTC
by stimulated
peripheral blood monocytes. In addition to competing with AA
for oxidative enzymes, DGLA cannot be converted to inflammatory LTs. Rather, it is converted by means of 15-LOX to a
15-hydroxy-DGLA, which has the capacity to inhibit 5-LOX and
12-LOX activities. DGLA should have anti-inflammatory actions
because of its capacity to reduce synthesis of oxygenation products
of AA through the COX and LOX pathways.
Essential fatty acids are also important for the maintenance of
cell membrane structure and function, and they protect the gastric
mucosa from NSAID-induced injury. DGLA can also modulate
immune responses in an eicosanoid-independent manner. DGLA
suppresses IL-2 production by human peripheral blood monocytes in vitro, suppresses proliferation of IL-2-dependent human
peripheral blood and synovial tissue T lymphocytes, and reduces
expression of activation markers on T lymphocytes directly in
a manner that is independent of its conversion to eicosanoids.
Oral administration of oils enriched in GLA, but not administration of oils enriched in linoleic acid (the parent n-6 fatty acid)
or
α
-linolenic acid (the parent n-3 fatty acid), reduces proliferation of human lymphocytes activated through the T cell receptor
complex.
The addition of GLA to peripheral blood mononuclear cells
in vitro or oral administration of GLA to volunteers reduces production of IL-1
β
and TNF from stimulated cells and reduces
autoinduction of IL-1
β
, preserving the protective effects of IL-1
β
,
while suppressing excessive production of the cytokine.
GLA
has suppressed acute and chronic inflammation, including arthritis, in several animal models; randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trials of GLA in patients with RA and active synovitis
indicated that GLA treatment results in statistically significant
and clinically relevant reduction in signs and symptoms of disease
activity compared with baseline and placebo. GLA also reduces
the need for NSAID and corticosteroid therapy.
EPA suppresses conversion of DGLA to AA, and a combination of EPA- and GLA-enriched oils exhibited synergy in its
capacity to reduce the induction of synovitis in animal models.
In addition, administration of black currant seed oil, which contains the n-3 fatty acid
α
-linolenic acid (which is converted to
EPA) and the n-6 GLA, suppresses active synovitis in patients
with RA.
The synergy observed in the animal models was not
reprised in an 18-month double-blind trial of a combination of
fish oil and borage oil in patients with RA. Nevertheless, treatment with each oil alone and with the combination resulted in
meaningful clinical responses equivalent to treatment with methotrexate, including a reduction in drug therapy greater than that
seen in matched patients from an RA registry. In addition, all
three treatment groups exhibited significantly reduced total and
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides, increased
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and an improved plasma
atherogenic index.
Much larger amounts of the polyunsaturated fatty acids (GLA, EPA, and DHA) can be delivered in far
smaller capsules than are needed to accommodate the natural oils,
a strategy that should be adopted to improve compliance.

### Additional Novel Prostaglandins: Endocannabinoid

Anandamide
A novel class of prostaglandins, the PG ethanolamides, are products of the action of COX-2 on anandamide.
This was studied using recombinant human cyclooxygenase-1 (hCOX-1) and
hCOX-2 that was expressed using
Baculovirus
. Only COX-2 was
effective, whereas COX-1 did not cause metabolism. This was
accompanied by increased MAP kinase activity and increased

phosphorylation of the arachidonate-specific cytoplasmic phospholipase A2. Anandamide, or arachidonoyl ethanolamide, is a
ligand for both CB1 and CB2 and it stimulates the release of free
arachidonic acid and PGE
in WI-38 fibroblasts when treated
with anandamide.
Anandamide caused a concentration-dependent increase in
J-series prostaglandin production and apoptosis in JWF2 keratinocytes.
Anandamide was added to the culture media of the
cells at final concentrations of 5, 10, 20, or 30
μ
M. The treatment
was allowed to proceed for 18 hours; PGJ was measured by radioimmunoassay. The ELISA also measures other J-series prostaglandins but not prostaglandins of the E-, F-, or D-series.
N-Arachidonylglycine and 2-Arachidonoylglycerol
2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) is an endogenous agonist of the
CB
receptor and the primary endogenous ligand for the CB
receptor. It is an ester formed from arachidonic acid and glycerol
at the 2 position, present at relatively high levels in the central nervous system, that mediates cannabinoid neuromodulatory effects.
2-AG is also a selective substrate for the inducible isoform of prostaglandin H synthase, PGHS-2, and its action on 2-AG leads to
the formation of glyceryl esters of prostaglandins.

> Anandamide

> N-arachidonoylglycine (NAgly)

> CH

> OH

> O

> –tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)

> ∆

> COOH

> R

> R

> O

> Ajulemic Acid (AJA, Lenabasum)

> OH

> OH

> OH

> O

> OH

> Lipoxin A

> (LXA

> )

•

*Fig. 27.10*

> Structure of eicocannabinoids.

N
-arachidonylglycine (NAgly) is a conjugate of glycine and
arachidonic acid through amide bond formation (
Fig. 27.10
).
NAgly binds to G protein receptor 18 (GPR18) and has a wide
range of targets in the brain, the immune system, and throughout
various other bodily systems. NAgly has been shown to act as a
substrate for COX-2 that selectively metabolizes NAgly to prostaglandinH
-glycine and HETE-gly.133 It also promotes a robust
increase in the release of free arachidonic acid in cultured human
synovial cells (
Fig. 27.2
). The in vitro actions of NAgly are due to
the action of the GPCR receptor GPR18; 3
μ
M NAgly caused a
100% rise in PGJ concentrations in the media.
There is a selective transformation of arachidonic acid to PGD
that is mediated
by COX-2 and PGD synthetase. In an unregulated process, PGD
is rapidly converted to PGJ
.
Synthetic Cannabinoids
CP-55,940.
The effects of a synthetic CB agonist CP-55,940
(systemic 3 mg) on PG levels in female mouse brain regions was
studied.
15 changes (10 increases, 5 decreases) in PG levels
were observed in the brain, 5 for each PG screened. Apart from
a decrease in PGE
in the hypothalamus, all changes in PGF
and PGE
were increases. Eight brain regions were dissected

> CONHCH

> CH

> OH

> CONHCH

> COOH

> CH

> OH

> HO

> Cannabidiol (CBD)

> OH

> COOH

> O

> 15-deoxy-∆-13,14-PGJ

> (PGJ)

and levels of approximately 80 lipids were screened from each
region using high-performance liquid chromatography and mass
spectrometry.
Ajulemic Acid (Lenabasum).
Ajulemic acid (AJA) is a
first-in-class, synthetic, orally active, THC analog that preferentially binds to the CB2 receptor and is nonpsychoactive.
AJA increased the steady state levels of COX2 mRNA and arachidonic acid release from human fibroblast-like synoviocytes
(FLS). Treatment of FLS with AJA also increased PGJ production
in a concentration-dependent manner but did not affect PGE
production significantly in FLS isolated from tissue obtained at
joint replacement surgery or cultured from synovial fluid. Cells
were treated with AJA and then were stimulated with TNF. AJA
could potentially have utility in conditions like systemic sclerosis, cystic fibrosis, dermatomyositis, and SLE. It appears to be a
potent inflammation-resolving drug with a unique mechanism
of action, distinct from the NSAIDs.
AJA also promotes the synthesis of LXA
in FLS cells under
the same conditions. LXA
production results from the sequential
actions of 5- and 15-LOX following the release of free arachidonic
acid. LXA
is an important member of the emerging class of molecules known as SPMs, which promote the resolution of chronic
inflammation.

Full references for this chapter can be found on Elsevier eBooks+.

## Selected References

> 1.	 Brash AR: Specific lipoxygenase attack on arachidonic acid and

> linoleate esterified in phosphatidylcholine: precedent for an alter-

> native mechanism in activation of eicosanoid biosynthesis,

> Adv

> Prostaglandin Thromboxane Leukot Res

> , 1985.

> 2.	 Dennis EA, Cao J, Hsu YH, et  al.: Phospholipase A2 enzymes:

> physical structure, biological function, disease implication, chemi-

> cal inhibition, and therapeutic intervention,

> Chem Rev

> 111:6130,

> 2011.

> 3.	 Krizaj J: Roles of secreted phospholipases A2 in the mammalian

> immune system,

> Protein Pept Lett

> 21:1201–1208, 2014.

> 4.	 Sun GY, Chuang DY, Zong Y, et al.: Role of cytosolic phospholi-

> pase A2 in oxidative and inflammatory signaling pathways in differ-

> ent cell types in the central nervous system,

> Mol Neurobiol

> 50:6–14,

> 2014.

> 5.	 Hasham SN, Pillarisetti S: Vascular lipases, inflammation, and ath-

> erosclerosis,

> Clin Chim Acta

> 372:179, 2006.

> 6.	 Bomalaski JS, Clark MA, Zurier RB: Enhanced phospholipase

> activity in peripheral blood monocytes from patients with rheuma-

> toid arthritis,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 29:312, 1986.

> 7.	 Boillard E, Lai Y, Larabee K, et  al.: A novel anti-inflammatory

> role for phospholipase A2 in immune complex-mediated arthritis,

> EMBO Mol Med

> 2:172, 2010.

> 8.	 Bryant KJ, Bidgood MJ, Lei PW: A bifunctional role for group

> IIA secreted phospholipase A2 in human rheumatoid fibroblast-like

> synoviocyte arachidonic acid metabolism,

> J Biol Chem

> 286:2492,

> 2011.

> 9.	 Gomez-Cambronero J: New concepts in phospholipase D signaling

> in inflammation and cancer,

> Sci World J

> 10:1356, 2010.

> 10.	 Budd DC, Qian Y: Development of lysophosphatidic acid path-

> way modulators as therapies for fibrosis,

> Future Med Chem

> 5:1935,

> 2013.

> 11.	 Botting RM: Vane’s discovery of the mechanism of action of aspirin

> changed our understanding of its clinical pharmacology,

> Pharmacol

> Rep

> 62:518, 2010.

> 12.	 Bozza PT, Yu W, Penrose JF, et al.: Eosinophil lipid bodies: spe-

> cific, inducible intracellular sites for enhanced eicosanoid forma-

> tion,

> J Exp Med

> 186:909, 1997.

> 13.	 Smith WL, DeWitt DL, Garavito RM: Cyclooxygenases: struc-

> tural, cellular, and molecular biology,

> Annu Rev Biochem

> 69:145,

> 2000.

> 14.	 Roos KL, Simmons DL: Cyclooxygenase variants: the role of alter-

> native splicing,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:62, 2005.

> 15.	 Rouzer CA, Marnett LJ: Cyclooxygenases: structural and functional

> insights,

> J Lipid Res

> 50:S29, 2009.

> 16.	 Telliez A, Furman C, Pommery N, et al.: Mechanisms leading to

> COX-2 expression and COX-2 induced tumorigenesis: topical

> therapeutic strategies targeting COX-2 expression and activity,

> Anti

> Cancer Agents Med Chem

> 6:187, 2006.

> 17.	 Debey S, Meyer-Kirchrath J, Schror K: Regulation of cyclooxygen-

> ase-2 expression in iloprost in human vascular smooth muscle cells:

> role of transcription factors CREB and ICER,

> Biochem Pharmacol

> 65:979, 2003.

> 18.	 Morris T, Stables M, Gilroy DW: New perspectives on aspirin and

> the endogenous control of acute inflammatory resolution,

> Sci World

> J

> 6:1048, 2006.

> 19.	 Dinchuk JE, Car BD, Focht RJ, et al.: Renal abnormalities and an

> altered inflammatory response in mice lacking cyclooxygenase II,

> Nature

> 378:406, 1995.

> 20.	 Thomas L:

> The lives of a cell

> , New York, 1995, Penguin.

> 21.	 Cornett AL, Lutz CS: Regulation of COX-2 expression by miR-

> 146a in lung cancer cells,

> RNA

> 20:1419–1430, 2014.

> 22.	 Snipes JA: Cloning and characterization of cyclooxygenase-1b

> (putative Cox-3) in rat,

> J Pharm Exp Ther

> 313:668, 2005.

> 23.	 Wu KK, Liou JY: Cellular and molecular biology of prostacyclin

> synthase,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:45, 2005.

> 24.	 Korbecki J, Baranowska-Bosiacka I, Gutowska I, et al.: The effect of

> reactive oxygen species on the synthesis of prostanoids from arachi-

> donic acid,

> J Physiol Pharmacol

> 64:409, 2013.

> 25.	 Liu F, Mih JD, Shea BS, et al.: Feedback amplification of fibro-

> sis through matrix stiffening and COX-2 suppression,

> J Cell Biol

> 190:693, 2010.

> 26.	 Koeberle A, Werz O: Inhibitors of the microsomal prostaglandin

> E(2) synthase-1 as alternative to non steroidal anti-inflammatory

> drugs (NSAIDs)—a critical review,

> Curr Med Chem

> 16:4274,

> 2009.

> 27.	 Gosset M, Pigenet A, Salvat C, et al.: Inhibition of matrix metal-

> loproteinase-3 and -13 synthesis induced by IL-1

> β

> in chondrocytes

> from mice lacking microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1,

> J Immu-

> nol

> 185:6244, 2010.

> 28.	 Kurzrock R, Lieb CC: Biochemical studies of human semen, II:

> the action of semen on the human uterus,

> Proc Soc Exp Biol Med

> 28:268, 1930.

> 29.	 von Euler US: On the specific vasodilating and plain muscle stimu-

> lating substances from accessory genital glands in man and certain

> animals (prostaglandin and vesiglandin),

> J Physiol (Lond)

> 88:213,

> 1936.

> 30.	 Bergstrom S, Ryhage R, Samuelsson B: The structure of prostaglan-

> dins E1, F1, and F2,

> Acta Chem Scand

> 16:501, 1962.

> 31.	 Rodriguez M, Domingo E, Municio C, et al.: Polarization of the

> innate immune response by prostaglandin E2: a puzzle of receptors

> and signals,

> Mol Pharmacol

> 85:187, 2014.

> 32.	 Raisz LG: Pathogenesis of osteoporosis: concepts, conflicts, and

> prospects,

> J Clin Invest

> 115:3318, 2005.

> 33.	 Marks SC, Miller SC: Prostaglandins and the skeleton: the legacy

> and challenges of two decades of research,

> Endocr J

> 1:337, 1993.

> 34.	 Blackwell CA, Raisz LG, Pilbeam CC: Prostaglandins in bone: bad

> cop, good cop?

> Trends Endocrinol Metab

> 21:294, 2010.

> 35.	 Abramson SB, Yazici Y: Biologics in development for rheumatoid

> arthritis: relevance to osteoarthritis,

> Adv Drug Deliv Rev

> 58:212,

> 2006.

> 36.	 Abramson SB: Developments in the scientific understanding of

> osteoarthritis,

> Arthritis Res Ther

> 11:227, 2009.

> 37.	 Hueber AJ, Asquith DL, Miller AM, et  al.: Mast cells express

> IL-17A in rheumatoid arthritis synovium,

> J Immunol

> 184:3336,

> 2010.

> 38.	 Scher JU, Pillinger MH: The anti-inflammatory effects of prosta-

> glandins,

> J Investig Med

> 57:703, 2009.

> 39.	 Zhu X, Walton RG, Tian L, et al.: Prostaglandin A2 enhances cel-

> lular insulin sensitivity via a mechanism that involves the orphan

> nuclear receptor NR4A3,

> Horm Metab Res

> 45:213, 2013.

> 40.	 Moncada S, Gryglewski R, Bunting S, et al.: An enzyme isolated

> from arteries transforms prostaglandin endoperoxides to an unsta-

> ble substance that inhibits platelet aggregation,

> Nature

> 263:633,

> 1976.

> 41.	 Bertagnolli MM, Eagle CJ, Zauber AG, et al.: Celecoxib for the

> prevention of sporadic colorectal adenomas,

> N Engl J Med

> 355:873,

> 2006.

> 42.	 Zamanian RT, Kudelko KT, Sung YK, et al.: Current clinical man-

> agement of pulmonary arterial hypertension,

> Circ Res

> , 2014.

> 43.	 Sharma M, Pinnamaneni S, Aronow WS, et al.: Existing drugs and

> drugs under investigation for pulmonary arterial hypertension,

> Cardiol Rev

> 22:297–305, 2014.

> 44.	 Vorhies EE, Caruthers RL, Rosenberg H, et  al.: Use of inhaled

> iloprost for the management of postoperative pulmonary hyper-

> tension in congenital heart surgery patients: review of a transition

> protocol,

> Pediatr Cardiol

> 35:1337–1343, 2014.

> 45.	 Remuzzi G, Fitzgerald GA, Patrono C: Thromboxane synthesis and

> action within the kidney,

> Kidney Int

> 41:1483, 1992.

> 46.	 Neath SX, Jefferies JL, Berger JS, et al.: The current and future land-

> scape of urinary thromboxane testing to evaluate atherothrombotic

> risk,

> Rev Cardiovasc Med

> 15:119, 2014.

> 47.	 Floyd CN, Ferro A: Mechanisms of aspirin resistance,

> Pharmacol

> Ther

> 141(69), 2014.

> 48.	 Sakariassen KS, Alberts P, Fontana P, et al.: Effect of pharmaceuti-

> cal interventions targeting thromboxane receptors and thrombox-

> ane synthase in cardiovascular and renal diseases,

> Future Cardiol

> 5:479, 2009.

> 49.	 Shankar H, Kahner B, Kunapuli SP: G-protein dependent platelet

> signaling: perspectives for therapy,

> Curr Drug Targets

> 7:1253, 2006.

> 50.	 Osher E, Weisinger G, Limor R, et al.: The 5 lipoxygenase system

> in the vasculature: emerging role in health and disease,

> Mol Cell

> Endocrinol

> 252:201, 2006.

> 51.	 Chang WC, Chen BK: Transcription factor Sp1 functions as an

> anchor protein in gene transcription of human 12(S)-lipoxygenase,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:117, 2005.

> 52.	 Corser-Jensen CE, Goodell DJ, Freund RK, et al.: Blocking leuko

> triene synthesis attenuates the pathophysiology of traumatic brain

> injury and associated cognitive deficits,

> Exp Neurol

> , 2014.

> 53.	 Rådmark O, Werz O, Steinhilber D, et al.: 5-Lipoxygenase, a key

> enzyme for leukotriene biosynthesis in health and disease,

> Biochim

> Biophys Acta

> 1851:331–339, 2015.

> 54.	 Folco G, Murphy RC: Eicosanoid transcellular biosynthesis: from

> cell-cell interactions to in  vivo tissue responses,

> Pharmacol Rev

> 58:375, 2006.

> 55.	 Korotkova M, Lundberg IE: The skeletal muscle arachidonic acid

> cascade in health and inflammatory disease,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 10:295, 2014.

> 56.	 Le Bel M, Brunet A, Gosselin J: Leukotriene B4, an endogenous

> stimulator of the innate immune response against pathogens,

> Innate Immun

> 6:159, 2014.

> 57.	 Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA: Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their receptors;

> emerging concepts,

> Allergy Asthma Immunol Res

> 6:288, 2014.

> 58.	 Caliskan B, Banoglu E: Overview of recent drug discovery

> approaches for new generation leukotriene A4 hydrolase inhibitors,

> Expert Opin Drug Discov

> 8(49), 2013.

> 59.	 Bukhari SN, Lauro G, Jantan I, et  al.: Pharmacological evalua-

> tion and docking studies of alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyl based

> synthetic compounds as inhibitors of secretory phospholipase A2,

> cyclooxygenases, lipoxygenase and proinflammatory cytokines,

> Bioorg Med Chem

> 22:4151, 2014.

> 60.	 Nieves D, Moreno JJ: Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids released

> through cytochrome P450 pathway regulate 3T6 fibroblast growth,

> J Lipid Res

> 47:2681–2689, 2006.

> 61.	 Meirer K, Steinhilber D, Proschak E: Inhibitors of the arachidonic

> acid cascade: interfering with multiple pathways,

> Basic Clin Phar-

> macol Toxicol

> 114:83, 2014.

> 62.	 Mani I, Iversen L, Ziboh VA: Upregulation of nuclear PKC and

> MAP-kinase during hyperproliferation of Guinea pig epidermis:

> modulation by 13-(s) hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (13-HODE),

> Cell Signal

> 10(143), 1998.

> 63.	 Calder PC: Marine omega-3 fatty acids and inflammatory pro-

> cesses: effects, mechanisms, and clinical relevance,

> Biochim Biophys

> Acta

> 1851:469–484, 2014.

> 64.	 Serhan CN, Cish CB, Brannon J, et al.: Anti-microinflammatory

> lipid signals generated from dietary N-3 fatty acids via cyclooxygen-

> ase-2 and transcellular processing: a novel mechanism for NSAID

> and N-3 PUFA therapeutic actions,

> J Physiol Pharmacol

> 51:643,

> 2000.

> 65.	 Ryan GB, Majno G: Acute inflammation. A review,

> Am J Pathol

> 86:185, 1977.

> 66.	 Serhan CN, Chiang N: Resolution phase mediators of inflamma-

> tion: agonists of resolution,

> Curr Opin Pharmacol

> 13(1), 2013.

> 67.	 Ohse T, Ota T, Godson C, et al.: Modulation of interferon induced

> genes by lipoxin analogue in anti-glomerular basement membrane

> nephritis,

> J Am Soc Nephrol

> 15:919, 2004.

> 68.	 Buckley CD, Gilroy DW, Serhan CN: Proresolving lipid mediators

> and mechanisms in the resolution of acute inflammation,

> Immunity

> 40:315, 2014.

> 69.	 Serhan CN: Pro-resolving lipid mediators are leads for resolution

> physiology,

> Nature

> 510(92), 2014.

> 70.	 Spite M, Claria J, Serhan CN: Resolvins, specialized pro-resolving

> lipid mediators, and their potential roles in metabolic diseases,

> Cell

> Metab

> 19:21, 2014.

> 71.	 Vigor C, Bertrand-Michel J, Pinot E, et al.: Nonenzymatic lipid

> oxidation products in biological systems: assessment of the metabo-

> lites from polyunsaturated fatty acids,

> J Chromatogr B Analyt Tech-

> nol Biomed Life Sci

> , 2014.

> 72.	 Leung KS, Galano JM, Durand T, et al.: Current development in

> non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation products, isoprostanoids, and

> isofuranoids in novel biological samples,

> Free Radic Res

> , 2014.

> 73.	 Bauerova K, Acquaviva A, Ponist S, et al.: Markers of inflammation

> and oxidative stress studied in adjuvant induced arthritis in the rat

> on systemic and local level affected by pinosylvin and methotrexate

> and their combination,

> Autoimmunity

> , 2014.

> 74.	 Pertwee RG: Elevating endocannabinoid levels: pharmacologi-

> cal strategies and potential therapeutic applications,

> Proc Nutr Soc

> 73:96, 2014.

> 75.	 Burstein S: The elmiric acids: biologically active anandamide ana-

> logs,

> Neuropharmacology

> 55:1259, 2008.

> 76.	 Sido JM, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M: Role of endocannabinoid

> activation of peripheral CB1 receptors in the regulation of autoim-

> mune diseases,

> Int Rev Immunol

> 34:403–414, 2014.

> 77.	 Witkampf R, Meijerink J: The endocannabinoid system: an emerg-

> ing key player in inflammation,

> Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care

> 17:130, 2014.

> 78.	 Alhouayek M, Muccioli GG: COX-2 derived endocannabinoid

> J

> metabolites as novel inflammatory mediators,

> Trends Pharmacol Sci

> 35:284, 2014.

> 79.	 Davis MP: Cannabinoids in pain management: CB1, CB2 and non-

> classic receptor ligands,

> Expert Opin Investig Drugs

> 23:1123, 2014.

> 80.	 Cipriano M, Bjorklund E, Wilson AA, et al.: Inhibition of fatty

> acid amide hydrolase and cyclooxygenase by the N-(3-methylpyr-

> idin-2-yl)amide derivatives of flurbiprofen and naproxen,

> Eur J

> Pharmacol

> 720:383, 2013.

> 81.	 Kohno M, Hasegawa H, Inoue A, et al.: Identification of N-ara-

> chidonylglycine as the endogenous ligand for the orphan G-pro-

> tein-coupled receptor GPR18,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 347:827, 2006.

> 82.	 Hata AN, Breyer RM: Pharmacology and signaling of prostaglan-

> din receptors: multiple roles in inflammation and immune modula-

> tion,

> Pharmacol Ther

> 103:147, 2006.

> 83.	 Clark P, Rowland S, Denis D: MF498[N-{[4-(5,9-diethoxy-6-oxo-

> 6,8-dihydro-7H-pyrrolo[3,4-g]quinolin-7-yl)-3-methylbenzyl]

> sulfonyl}-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)acetamide], a selective prostanoid

> receptor 4 antagonist, relieves joint inflammation and pain in

> rodent models of rheumatoid and osteoarthritis,

> J Pharmacol Exp

> Ther

> 325:425, 2008.

> 84.	 Norman P: Update on the status of DP2 receptor antagonists: from

> proof of concept through clinical failures to promising new drugs,

> Expert Opin Investig Drugs

> 23(55), 2014.

> 85.	 Capra V, Back M, Angiolillo DJ, et al.: Impact of vascular throm-

> boxane prostanoid receptor activation on hemostasis, thrombosis,

> oxidative stress, and inflammation,

> J Thromb Haemost

> 12:126,

> 2014.

> 86.	 Sakata D, Yao C, Narumiya S: Emerging roles of prostanoids in T

> cell-mediated immunity,

> IUBMB Life

> 62:591, 2010.

> 87.	 Oga T, Matsuoka T, Yao C, et al.: Prostaglandin F(2alpha) receptor

> signaling facilitates bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis inde-

> pendently of transforming growth factor-beta,

> Nat Med

> 15:1426,

> 2009.

> 88.	 Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA: Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their receptors;

> emerging concepts,

> Allergy Asthma Immunol Res

> 6:288, 2014.

> 89.	 Theron AJ, Steel HC, Tintiger GR, et  al.: Cysteinyl leukotriene

> receptor-1 antagonists as modulators of innate immune cell func-

> tion,

> J Immunol Res

> 608930, 2014.

> 90.	 Mathis SP, Jala VR, Lee D, et al.: Nonredundant roles for leukotri-

> ene receptors BLT1 and BLT2 in inflammatory arthritis,

> J Immunol

> 185:3049, 2010.

> 91.	 Di Gennaro A, Haeggstrom JZ: Targeting leukotriene B4 in inflam-

> mation,

> Expert Opin Ther Targets

> 18:79, 2014.

> 92.	 Thompson MD, Hendy GN, Percy ME, et al.: G protein-coupled

> receptor mutations in human genetic disease,

> Methods Mol Biol

> 1175:153, 2014.

> 93.	 Back M, Powell WS, Dahlen S-E, et al.: Update on leukotriene,

> lipoxin and oxoeicosanoid receptors: IUPHAR review 7,

> Br J Phar-

> macol

> 171:3551, 2014.

> 94.	 Choi SS, Park J, Choi JH: Revisiting PPAR

> γ

> as a target for treat-

> ment of metabolic disorders,

> BMB Rep

> 47:599–608, 2014.

> 95.	 Ricote M, Li AC, Willson TM, et al.: The peroxisome-proliferator-

> activated receptor-gamma is a negative regulator of macrophage

> activation,

> Nature

> 391(79), 1998.

> 96.	 Freitag CM, Miller RJ: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor

> agonists modulate neuropathic pain: a link to chemokines?

> Front

> Cell Neurosci

> 8:238, 2014.

> 97.	 Wright MB, Bortolini M, Tadayyon M, et al.: Minireview: chal-

> lenges and opportunities in development of PPAR agonists,

> Mol

> Endocrinol

> 28:1756–1768, 2014.

> 98.	 Yik JH, Hu Z, Kumari R, et al.: Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 inhibi-

> tion protects cartilage from the catabolic effects of proinflammatory

> cytokines,

> Arthritis Rheumatol

> 66:1537, 2014.

> 99.	 Xu H, Valenzuela N, Fai S, et al.: Targeted lipidomics—advances in

> profiling lysophosphocholine and platelet-activating factor second

> messengers,

> FEBS J

> 280:5652, 2013.

> 100.	 Marathe GK, Pandit CL, Lakshmikanth VH, et al.: To hydrolyse

> or not to hydrolyse: the dilemma of platelet activating factor acetyl

> hydrolase (PAF-AH),

> J Lipid Res

> 55:1847, 2014.

> 101.	 Stafforini DM, Zimmerman GA: Unraveling the PAF-AH/Lp-

> PLA2 controversy,

> J Lipid Res

> 55:1811, 2014.

> 102.	 Yu Y, Zhang M, Cai Q, et al.: Synergistic effects of combined plate-

> let-activating factor receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor

> targeting in ovarian cancer cells,

> J Hematol Oncol

> 7:39, 2014.

> 103.	 Zurier RB: Prostaglandins: then, now, and next,

> Semin Arth Rheum

> 33:137, 2003.

> 104.	 Manferdini C, Maumus M, Gabusi E, et  al.: Adipose-derived

> mesenchymal stem cells exert anti-inflammatory effects on chon-

> drocytes and synoviocytes from osteoarthritic patients through

> prostaglandin E2,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 65:1271, 2013.

> 105.	 Zurier RB, Hoffstein S, Weissmann G: Suppression of acute and

> chronic inflammation in adrenalectomized rats by pharmacologic

> amounts of prostaglandins,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 16:606, 1973.

> 106.	 Weissmann G, Montesinos MC, Pillinger M, et al.: Non-prosta-

> glandin effects of aspirin III and salicylate: inhibition of integrin-

> dependent human neutrophil aggregation and inflammation in

> COX2 and NF kappa B (P105)-knockout mice,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 507:571, 2002.

> 107.	 Bygdeman M, Samuelsson B: Quantitative determination of pros-

> taglandins in human semen,

> Clin Chim Acta

> 10:566, 1964.

> 108.	 Karim SMM, Soindler M, Williams ED: Distribution of prosta-

> glandins in human tissues,

> Br J Pharmacol Chemother

> 31:340,

> 1967.

> 109.	 Horrobin DF: The roles of essential fatty acids in the development

> of diabetic neuropathy and other complications of diabetes mel-

> litus,

> Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids

> 31:181, 1988.

> 110.	 Ricciotti E, Fitzgerald GA: Prostaglandins and inflammation,

> Arte-

> rioscler Thromb Vasc Biol

> 31:986, 2011.

> 111.	 Torres R, Herrerias A, Sera-Pages M, et al.: Locally administered

> prostaglandin E2 prevents aeroallergen-induced airway sensitiza-

> tion in mice through immunomodulatory mechanisms,

> Pharmacol

> Res

> 70(50), 2013.

> 112.	 Fabricus D, Neubauer M, Mandel B, et al.: Prostaglandin E2 inhib-

> its IFN-

> α

> secretion and Th1 costimulation by human plasmacy-

> toid dendritic cells via E-prostanoid 2 and E-prostanoid 4 receptor

> engagement,

> J Immunol

> 184:677, 2010.

> 113.	 Chan MM, Moore AR: Resolution of inflammation in murine

> autoimmune arthritis is disrupted by cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition

> and restored by prostaglandin E2-mediated lipoxin A4 production,

> J Immunol

> 184:6418, 2010.

> 114.	 van Dorp DA, Beer Thuis RK, Nugteren DH: The biosynthesis of

> prostaglandins,

> Biochim Biophys Acta

> 90:204, 1964.

> 115.	 Bergstrom S, Daniellson H, Samuelsson B: The enzymatic forma-

> tion of prostaglandin E2 from arachidonic acid,

> Biochim Biophys

> Acta

> 90:207, 1964.

> 116.	 Bergstrom S, Daniellson H, Klenberg D, et  al.: The enzymatic

> conversion of essential fatty acids into prostaglandins,

> J Biol Chem

> 239:4006, 1964.

> 117.	 Yates CM, Calder PC, Rainger GE: Pharmacology and therapeutics

> of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in chronic inflammatory

> disease,

> Pharmacol Ther

> 141:272, 2014.

> 118.	 Legrand-Poels S, Esser N, L’homme L, et al.: Free fatty acids as

> modulators of the NLRP3 inflammasome in obesity/type 2 diabe-

> tes,

> Biochem Pharmacol

> 92:131–141, 2014.

> 119.	 Proudman SM, James MJ, Spargo LD, et al.: Fish oil in recent onset

> rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, double blind controlled trial

> within algorithm-based drug use,

> Ann Rheum Dis

> 74:89–95, 2015.

> 120.	 Kremer JM: Effects of modulation of inflammatory and immune

> parameters in patients with rheumatic and inflammatory disease

> receiving dietary supplementation of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids,

> Lipids

> 31:S253, 1996.

## References

> 1.	 Brash AR: Specific lipoxygenase attack on arachidonic acid and

> linoleate esterified in phosphatidylcholine: precedent for an alter-

> native mechanism in activation of eicosanoid biosynthesis,

> Adv

> Prostaglandin Thromboxane Leukot Res

> , 1985.

> 2.	 Dennis EA, Cao J, Hsu YH, et  al.: Phospholipase A2 enzymes:

> physical structure, biological function, disease implication, chemi-

> cal inhibition, and therapeutic intervention,

> Chem Rev

> 111:6130,

> 2011.

> 3.	 Krizaj J: Roles of secreted phospholipases A2 in the mammalian

> immune system,

> Protein Pept Lett

> 21:1201–1208, 2014.

> 4.	 Sun GY, Chuang DY, Zong Y, et al.: Role of cytosolic phospholi-

> pase A2 in oxidative and inflammatory signaling pathways in differ-

> ent cell types in the central nervous system,

> Mol Neurobiol

> 50:6–14,

> 2014.

> 5.	 Hasham SN, Pillarisetti S: Vascular lipases, inflammation, and ath-

> erosclerosis,

> Clin Chim Acta

> 372:179, 2006.

> 6.	 Bomalaski JS, Clark MA, Zurier RB: Enhanced phospholipase

> activity in peripheral blood monocytes from patients with rheuma-

> toid arthritis,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 29:312, 1986.

> 7.	 Boillard E, Lai Y, Larabee K, et  al.: A novel anti-inflammatory

> role for phospholipase A2 in immune complex-mediated arthritis,

> EMBO Mol Med

> 2:172, 2010.

> 8.	 Bryant KJ, Bidgood MJ, Lei PW: A bifunctional role for group

> IIA secreted phospholipase A2 in human rheumatoid fibroblast-like

> synoviocyte arachidonic acid metabolism,

> J Biol Chem

> 286:2492,

> 2011.

> 9.	 Gomez-Cambronero J: New concepts in phospholipase D signaling

> in inflammation and cancer,

> Sci World J

> 10:1356, 2010.

> 10.	 Budd DC, Qian Y: Development of lysophosphatidic acid path-

> way modulators as therapies for fibrosis,

> Future Med Chem

> 5:1935,

> 2013.

> 11.	 Botting RM: Vane’s discovery of the mechanism of action of aspirin

> changed our understanding of its clinical pharmacology,

> Pharmacol

> Rep

> 62:518, 2010.

> 12.	 Bozza PT, Yu W, Penrose JF, et al.: Eosinophil lipid bodies: spe-

> cific, inducible intracellular sites for enhanced eicosanoid forma-

> tion,

> J Exp Med

> 186:909, 1997.

> 13.	 Smith WL, DeWitt DL, Garavito RM: Cyclooxygenases: struc-

> tural, cellular, and molecular biology,

> Annu Rev Biochem

> 69:145,

> 2000.

> 14.	 Roos KL, Simmons DL: Cyclooxygenase variants: the role of alter-

> native splicing,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:62, 2005.

> 15.	 Rouzer CA, Marnett LJ: Cyclooxygenases: structural and functional

> insights,

> J Lipid Res

> 50:S29, 2009.

> 16.	 Telliez A, Furman C, Pommery N, et al.: Mechanisms leading to

> COX-2 expression and COX-2 induced tumorigenesis: topical

> therapeutic strategies targeting COX-2 expression and activity,

> Anti

> Cancer Agents Med Chem

> 6:187, 2006.

> 17.	 Debey S, Meyer-Kirchrath J, Schror K: Regulation of cyclooxygen-

> ase-2 expression in iloprost in human vascular smooth muscle cells:

> role of transcription factors CREB and ICER,

> Biochem Pharmacol

> 65:979, 2003.

> 18.	 Morris T, Stables M, Gilroy DW: New perspectives on aspirin and

> the endogenous control of acute inflammatory resolution,

> Sci World

> J

> 6:1048, 2006.

> 19.	 Dinchuk JE, Car BD, Focht RJ, et al.: Renal abnormalities and an

> altered inflammatory response in mice lacking cyclooxygenase II,

> Nature

> 378:406, 1995.

> 20.	 Thomas L:

> The lives of a cell

> , New York, 1995, Penguin.

> 21.	 Cornett AL, Lutz CS: Regulation of COX-2 expression by miR-

> 146a in lung cancer cells,

> RNA

> 20:1419–1430, 2014.

> 22.	 Snipes JA: Cloning and characterization of cyclooxygenase-1b

> (putative Cox-3) in rat,

> J Pharm Exp Ther

> 313:668, 2005.

> 23.	 Wu KK, Liou JY: Cellular and molecular biology of prostacyclin

> synthase,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:45, 2005.

> 24.	 Korbecki J, Baranowska-Bosiacka I, Gutowska I, et al.: The effect of

> reactive oxygen species on the synthesis of prostanoids from arachi-

> donic acid,

> J Physiol Pharmacol

> 64:409, 2013.

> 25.	 Liu F, Mih JD, Shea BS, et al.: Feedback amplification of fibro-

> sis through matrix stiffening and COX-2 suppression,

> J Cell Biol

> 190:693, 2010.

> 26.	 Koeberle A, Werz O: Inhibitors of the microsomal prostaglandin

> E(2) synthase-1 as alternative to non steroidal anti-inflammatory

> drugs (NSAIDs)—a critical review,

> Curr Med Chem

> 16:4274,

> 2009.

> 27.	 Gosset M, Pigenet A, Salvat C, et al.: Inhibition of matrix metal-

> loproteinase-3 and -13 synthesis induced by IL-1

> β

> in chondrocytes

> from mice lacking microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1,

> J Immu-

> nol

> 185:6244, 2010.

> 28.	 Kurzrock R, Lieb CC: Biochemical studies of human semen, II:

> the action of semen on the human uterus,

> Proc Soc Exp Biol Med

> 28:268, 1930.

> 29.	 von Euler US: On the specific vasodilating and plain muscle stimu-

> lating substances from accessory genital glands in man and certain

> animals (prostaglandin and vesiglandin),

> J Physiol (Lond)

> 88:213,

> 1936.

> 30.	 Bergstrom S, Ryhage R, Samuelsson B: The structure of prostaglan-

> dins E1, F1, and F2,

> Acta Chem Scand

> 16:501, 1962.

> 31.	 Rodriguez M, Domingo E, Municio C, et al.: Polarization of the

> innate immune response by prostaglandin E2: a puzzle of receptors

> and signals,

> Mol Pharmacol

> 85:187, 2014.

> 32.	 Raisz LG: Pathogenesis of osteoporosis: concepts, conflicts, and

> prospects,

> J Clin Invest

> 115:3318, 2005.

> 33.	 Marks SC, Miller SC: Prostaglandins and the skeleton: the legacy

> and challenges of two decades of research,

> Endocr J

> 1:337, 1993.

> 34.	 Blackwell CA, Raisz LG, Pilbeam CC: Prostaglandins in bone: bad

> cop, good cop?

> Trends Endocrinol Metab

> 21:294, 2010.

> 35.	 Abramson SB, Yazici Y: Biologics in development for rheumatoid

> arthritis: relevance to osteoarthritis,

> Adv Drug Deliv Rev

> 58:212,

> 2006.

> 36.	 Abramson SB: Developments in the scientific understanding of

> osteoarthritis,

> Arthritis Res Ther

> 11:227, 2009.

> 37.	 Hueber AJ, Asquith DL, Miller AM, et al.: Mast cells express IL-

> 17A in rheumatoid arthritis synovium,

> J Immunol

> 184:3336, 2010.

> 38.	 Scher JU, Pillinger MH: The anti-inflammatory effects of prosta-

> glandins,

> J Investig Med

> 57:703, 2009.

> 39.	 Zhu X, Walton RG, Tian L, et al.: Prostaglandin A2 enhances cel-

> lular insulin sensitivity via a mechanism that involves the orphan

> nuclear receptor NR4A3,

> Horm Metab Res

> 45:213, 2013.

> 40.	 Moncada S, Gryglewski R, Bunting S, et al.: An enzyme isolated

> from arteries transforms prostaglandin endoperoxides to an unsta-

> ble substance that inhibits platelet aggregation,

> Nature

> 263:633,

> 1976.

> 41.	 Bertagnolli MM, Eagle CJ, Zauber AG, et al.: Celecoxib for the

> prevention of sporadic colorectal adenomas,

> N Engl J Med

> 355:873,

> 2006.

> 42.	 Zamanian RT, Kudelko KT, Sung YK, et al.: Current clinical man-

> agement of pulmonary arterial hypertension,

> Circ Res

> , 2014.

> 43.	 Sharma M, Pinnamaneni S, Aronow WS, et al.: Existing drugs and

> drugs under investigation for pulmonary arterial hypertension,

> Cardiol Rev

> 22:297–305, 2014.

> 44.	 Vorhies EE, Caruthers RL, Rosenberg H, et  al.: Use of inhaled

> iloprost for the management of postoperative pulmonary hyper-

> tension in congenital heart surgery patients: review of a transition

> protocol,

> Pediatr Cardiol

> 35:1337–1343, 2014.

> 45.	 Remuzzi G, Fitzgerald GA, Patrono C: Thromboxane synthesis and

> action within the kidney,

> Kidney Int

> 41:1483, 1992.

> 46.	 Neath SX, Jefferies JL, Berger JS, et al.: The current and future land-

> scape of urinary thromboxane testing to evaluate atherothrombotic

> risk,

> Rev Cardiovasc Med

> 15:119, 2014.

> 47.	 Floyd CN, Ferro A: Mechanisms of aspirin resistance,

> Pharmacol

> Ther

> 141(69), 2014.

> 48.	 Sakariassen KS, Alberts P, Fontana P, et al.: Effect of pharmaceutical

> interventions targeting thromboxane receptors and thromboxane syn-

> thase in cardiovascular and renal diseases,

> Future Cardiol

> 5:479, 2009.

> 49.	 Shankar H, Kahner B, Kunapuli SP: G-protein dependent platelet

> signaling: perspectives for therapy,

> Curr Drug Targets

> 7:1253, 2006.

> 50.	 Osher E, Weisinger G, Limor R, et al.: The 5 lipoxygenase system

> in the vasculature: emerging role in health and disease,

> Mol Cell

> Endocrinol

> 252:201, 2006.

> 51.	 Chang WC, Chen BK: Transcription factor Sp1 functions as an

> anchor protein in gene transcription of human 12(S)-lipoxygenase,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 338:117, 2005.

> 52.	 Corser-Jensen CE, Goodell DJ, Freund RK, et al.: Blocking leuko

> triene synthesis attenuates the pathophysiology of traumatic brain

> injury and associated cognitive deficits,

> Exp Neurol

> , 2014.

> 53.	 Rådmark O, Werz O, Steinhilber D, et al.: 5-Lipoxygenase, a key

> enzyme for leukotriene biosynthesis in health and disease,

> Biochim

> Biophys Acta

> 1851:331–339, 2015.

> 54.	 Folco G, Murphy RC: Eicosanoid transcellular biosynthesis: from

> cell-cell interactions to in  vivo tissue responses,

> Pharmacol Rev

> 58:375, 2006.

> 55.	 Korotkova M, Lundberg IE: The skeletal muscle arachidonic acid

> cascade in health and inflammatory disease,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 10:295, 2014.

> 56.	 Le Bel M, Brunet A, Gosselin J: Leukotriene B4, an endogenous

> stimulator of the innate immune response against pathogens,

> J

> Innate Immun

> 6:159, 2014.

> 57.	 Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA: Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their receptors;

> emerging concepts,

> Allergy Asthma Immunol Res

> 6:288, 2014.

> 58.	 Caliskan B, Banoglu E: Overview of recent drug discovery

> approaches for new generation leukotriene A4 hydrolase inhibitors,

> Expert Opin Drug Discov

> 8(49), 2013.

> 59.	 Bukhari SN, Lauro G, Jantan I, et  al.: Pharmacological evalua-

> tion and docking studies of alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyl based

> synthetic compounds as inhibitors of secretory phospholipase A2,

> cyclooxygenases, lipoxygenase and proinflammatory cytokines,

> Bioorg Med Chem

> 22:4151, 2014.

> 60.	 Nieves D, Moreno JJ: Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids released

> through cytochrome P450 pathway regulate 3T6 fibroblast growth,

> J Lipid Res

> 47:2681–2689, 2006.

> 61.	 Meirer K, Steinhilber D, Proschak E: Inhibitors of the arachidonic

> acid cascade: interfering with multiple pathways,

> Basic Clin Phar-

> macol Toxicol

> 114:83, 2014.

> 62.	 Mani I, Iversen L, Ziboh VA: Upregulation of nuclear PKC and

> MAP-kinase during hyperproliferation of Guinea pig epidermis:

> modulation by 13-(s) hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (13-HODE),

> Cell Signal

> 10(143), 1998.

> 63.	 Calder PC: Marine omega-3 fatty acids and inflammatory pro-

> cesses: effects, mechanisms, and clinical relevance,

> Biochim Biophys

> Acta

> 1851:469–484, 2014.

> 64.	 Serhan CN, Cish CB, Brannon J, et al.: Anti-microinflammatory lipid

> signals generated from dietary N-3 fatty acids via cyclooxygenase-2

> and transcellular processing: a novel mechanism for NSAID and N-3

> PUFA therapeutic actions,

> J Physiol Pharmacol

> 51:643, 2000.

> 65.	 Ryan GB, Majno G: Acute inflammation. A review,

> Am J Pathol

> 86:185, 1977.

> 66.	 Serhan CN, Chiang N: Resolution phase mediators of inflamma-

> tion: agonists of resolution,

> Curr Opin Pharmacol

> 13(1), 2013.

> 67.	 Ohse T, Ota T, Godson C, et al.: Modulation of interferon induced

> genes by lipoxin analogue in anti-glomerular basement membrane

> nephritis,

> J Am Soc Nephrol

> 15:919, 2004.

> 68.	 Buckley CD, Gilroy DW, Serhan CN: Proresolving lipid mediators

> and mechanisms in the resolution of acute inflammation,

> Immunity

> 40:315, 2014.

> 69.	 Serhan CN: Pro-resolving lipid mediators are leads for resolution

> physiology,

> Nature

> 510(92), 2014.

> 70.	 Spite M, Claria J, Serhan CN: Resolvins, specialized pro-resolving

> lipid mediators, and their potential roles in metabolic diseases,

> Cell

> Metab

> 19:21, 2014.

> 71.	 Vigor C, Bertrand-Michel J, Pinot E, et al.: Nonenzymatic lipid

> oxidation products in biological systems: assessment of the metabo-

> lites from polyunsaturated fatty acids,

> J Chromatogr B Analyt Tech-

> nol Biomed Life Sci

> , 2014.

> 72.	 Leung KS, Galano JM, Durand T, et al.: Current development in

> non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation products, isoprostanoids, and

> isofuranoids in novel biological samples,

> Free Radic Res

> , 2014.

> 73.	 Bauerova K, Acquaviva A, Ponist S, et al.: Markers of inflammation

> and oxidative stress studied in adjuvant induced arthritis in the rat

> on systemic and local level affected by pinosylvin and methotrexate

> and their combination,

> Autoimmunity

> , 2014.

> 74.	 Pertwee RG: Elevating endocannabinoid levels: pharmacologi-

> cal strategies and potential therapeutic applications,

> Proc Nutr Soc

> 73:96, 2014.

> 75.	 Burstein S: The elmiric acids: biologically active anandamide ana-

> logs,

> Neuropharmacology

> 55:1259, 2008.

> 76.	 Sido JM, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M: Role of endocannabinoid

> activation of peripheral CB1 receptors in the regulation of autoim-

> mune diseases,

> Int Rev Immunol

> 34:403–414, 2014.

> 77.	 Witkampf R, Meijerink J: The endocannabinoid system: an emerg-

> ing key player in inflammation,

> Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care

> 17:130, 2014.

> 78.	 Alhouayek M, Muccioli GG: COX-2 derived endocannabinoid

> metabolites as novel inflammatory mediators,

> Trends Pharmacol Sci

> 35:284, 2014.

> 79.	 Davis MP: Cannabinoids in pain management: CB1, CB2 and non-

> classic receptor ligands,

> Expert Opin Investig Drugs

> 23:1123, 2014.

> 80.	 Cipriano M, Bjorklund E, Wilson AA, et al.: Inhibition of fatty

> acid amide hydrolase and cyclooxygenase by the N-(3-methylpyr-

> idin-2-yl)amide derivatives of flurbiprofen and naproxen,

> Eur J

> Pharmacol

> 720:383, 2013.

> 81.	 Kohno M, Hasegawa H, Inoue A, et al.: Identification of N-ara-

> chidonylglycine as the endogenous ligand for the orphan G-pro-

> tein-coupled receptor GPR18,

> Biochem Biophys Res Commun

> 347:827, 2006.

> 82.	 Hata AN, Breyer RM: Pharmacology and signaling of prostaglan-

> din receptors: multiple roles in inflammation and immune modula-

> tion,

> Pharmacol Ther

> 103:147, 2006.

> 83.	 Clark P, Rowland S, Denis D: MF498[N-{[4-(5,9-diethoxy-6-oxo-

> 6,8-dihydro-7H-pyrrolo[3,4-g]quinolin-7-yl)-3-methylbenzyl]

> sulfonyl}-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)acetamide], a selective prostanoid

> receptor 4 antagonist, relieves joint inflammation and pain in

> rodent models of rheumatoid and osteoarthritis,

> J Pharmacol Exp

> Ther

> 325:425, 2008.

> 84.	 Norman P: Update on the status of DP2 receptor antagonists: from

> proof of concept through clinical failures to promising new drugs,

> Expert Opin Investig Drugs

> 23(55), 2014.

> 85.	 Capra V, Back M, Angiolillo DJ, et al.: Impact of vascular thrombox-

> ane prostanoid receptor activation on hemostasis, thrombosis, oxida-

> tive stress, and inflammation,

> J Thromb Haemost

> 12:126, 2014.

> 86.	 Sakata D, Yao C, Narumiya S: Emerging roles of prostanoids in T

> cell-mediated immunity,

> IUBMB Life

> 62:591, 2010.

> 87.	 Oga T, Matsuoka T, Yao C, et al.: Prostaglandin F(2alpha) receptor

> signaling facilitates bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis indepen-

> dently of transforming growth factor-beta,

> Nat Med

> 15:1426, 2009.

> 88.	 Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA: Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their receptors;

> emerging concepts,

> Allergy Asthma Immunol Res

> 6:288, 2014.

> 89.	 Theron AJ, Steel HC, Tintiger GR, et  al.: Cysteinyl leukotriene

> receptor-1 antagonists as modulators of innate immune cell func-

> tion,

> J Immunol Res

> 608930, 2014.

> 90.	 Mathis SP, Jala VR, Lee D, et al.: Nonredundant roles for leukotri-

> ene receptors BLT1 and BLT2 in inflammatory arthritis,

> J Immunol

> 185:3049, 2010.

> 91.	 Di Gennaro A, Haeggstrom JZ: Targeting leukotriene B4 in inflam-

> mation,

> Expert Opin Ther Targets

> 18:79, 2014.

> 92.	 Thompson MD, Hendy GN, Percy ME, et al.: G protein-coupled

> receptor mutations in human genetic disease,

> Methods Mol Biol

> 1175:153, 2014.

> 93.	 Back M, Powell WS, Dahlen S-E, et al.: Update on leukotriene,

> lipoxin and oxoeicosanoid receptors: IUPHAR review 7,

> Br J Phar-

> macol

> 171:3551, 2014.

> 94.	 Choi SS, Park J, Choi JH: Revisiting PPAR

> γ

> as a target for treat-

> ment of metabolic disorders,

> BMB Rep

> 47:599–608, 2014.

> 95.	 Ricote M, Li AC, Willson TM, et al.: The peroxisome-proliferator-

> activated receptor-gamma is a negative regulator of macrophage

> activation,

> Nature

> 391(79), 1998.

> 96.	 Freitag CM, Miller RJ: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor

> agonists modulate neuropathic pain: a link to chemokines?

> Front

> Cell Neurosci

> 8:238, 2014.

> 97.	 Wright MB, Bortolini M, Tadayyon M, et al.: Minireview: chal-

> lenges and opportunities in development of PPAR agonists,

> Mol

> Endocrinol

> 28:1756–1768, 2014.

> 98.	 Yik JH, Hu Z, Kumari R, et al.: Cyclin-dependent kinase 9 inhibi-

> tion protects cartilage from the catabolic effects of proinflammatory

> cytokines,

> Arthritis Rheumatol

> 66:1537, 2014.

> 99.	 Xu H, Valenzuela N, Fai S, et al.: Targeted lipidomics—advances in

> profiling lysophosphocholine and platelet-activating factor second

> messengers,

> FEBS J

> 280:5652, 2013.

> 100.	 Marathe GK, Pandit CL, Lakshmikanth VH, et al.: To hydrolyse

> or not to hydrolyse: the dilemma of platelet activating factor acetyl

> hydrolase (PAF-AH),

> J Lipid Res

> 55:1847, 2014.

> 101.	 Stafforini DM, Zimmerman GA: Unraveling the PAF-AH/Lp-

> PLA2 controversy,

> J Lipid Res

> 55:1811, 2014.

> 102.	 Yu Y, Zhang M, Cai Q, et al.: Synergistic effects of combined plate-

> let-activating factor receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor

> targeting in ovarian cancer cells,

> J Hematol Oncol

> 7:39, 2014.

> 103.	 Zurier RB: Prostaglandins: then, now, and next,

> Semin Arth Rheum

> 33:137, 2003.

> 104.	 Manferdini C, Maumus M, Gabusi E, et  al.: Adipose-derived

> mesenchymal stem cells exert anti-inflammatory effects on chon-

> drocytes and synoviocytes from osteoarthritic patients through

> prostaglandin E2,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 65:1271, 2013.

> 105.	 Zurier RB, Hoffstein S, Weissmann G: Suppression of acute and

> chronic inflammation in adrenalectomized rats by pharmacologic

> amounts of prostaglandins,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 16:606, 1973.

> 106.	 Weissmann G, Montesinos MC, Pillinger M, et al.: Non-prosta-

> glandin effects of aspirin III and salicylate: inhibition of integrin-

> dependent human neutrophil aggregation and inflammation in

> COX2 and NF kappa B (P105)-knockout mice,

> Adv Exp Med Biol

> 507:571, 2002.

> 107.	 Bygdeman M, Samuelsson B: Quantitative determination of pros-

> taglandins in human semen,

> Clin Chim Acta

> 10:566, 1964.

> 108.	 Karim SMM, Soindler M, Williams ED: Distribution of prostaglan-

> dins in human tissues,

> Br J Pharmacol Chemother

> 31:340, 1967.

> 109.	 Horrobin DF: The roles of essential fatty acids in the development

> of diabetic neuropathy and other complications of diabetes mel-

> litus,

> Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids

> 31:181, 1988.

> 110.	 Ricciotti E, Fitzgerald GA: Prostaglandins and inflammation,

> Arte-

> rioscler Thromb Vasc Biol

> 31:986, 2011.

> 111.	 Torres R, Herrerias A, Sera-Pages M, et al.: Locally administered

> prostaglandin E2 prevents aeroallergen-induced airway sensitiza-

> tion in mice through immunomodulatory mechanisms,

> Pharmacol

> Res

> 70(50), 2013.

> 112.	 Fabricus D, Neubauer M, Mandel B, et al.: Prostaglandin E2 inhib-

> its IFN-

> α

> secretion and Th1 costimulation by human plasmacy-

> toid dendritic cells via E-prostanoid 2 and E-prostanoid 4 receptor

> engagement,

> J Immunol

> 184:677, 2010.

> 113.	 Chan MM, Moore AR: Resolution of inflammation in murine

> autoimmune arthritis is disrupted by cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition

> and restored by prostaglandin E2-mediated lipoxin A4 production,

> J Immunol

> 184:6418, 2010.

> 114.	 van Dorp DA, Beer Thuis RK, Nugteren DH: The biosynthesis of

> prostaglandins,

> Biochim Biophys Acta

> 90:204, 1964.

> 115.	 Bergstrom S, Daniellson H, Samuelsson B: The enzymatic forma-

> tion of prostaglandin E2 from arachidonic acid,

> Biochim Biophys

> Acta

> 90:207, 1964.

> 116.	 Bergstrom S, Daniellson H, Klenberg D, et  al.: The enzymatic

> conversion of essential fatty acids into prostaglandins,

> J Biol Chem

> 239:4006, 1964.

> 117.	 Yates CM, Calder PC, Rainger GE: Pharmacology and therapeutics

> of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in chronic inflammatory

> disease,

> Pharmacol Ther

> 141:272, 2014.

> 118.	 Legrand-Poels S, Esser N, L’homme L, et al.: Free fatty acids as

> modulators of the NLRP3 inflammasome in obesity/type 2 diabe-

> tes,

> Biochem Pharmacol

> 92:131–141, 2014.

> 119.	 Proudman SM, James MJ, Spargo LD, et al.: Fish oil in recent

> onset rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, double blind controlled

> trial within algorithm-based drug use,

> Ann Rheum Dis

> 74:89–95,

> 2015.

> 120.	 Kremer JM: Effects of modulation of inflammatory and immune

> parameters in patients with rheumatic and inflammatory disease

> receiving dietary supplementation of n-3 and n-6 fatty acids,

> Lipids

> 31:S253, 1996.

> 121.	 DeLuca P, Rothman D, Zurier RB: Marine and botanical lipids

> as immunomodulatory and therapeutic agents in the treatment of

> rheumatoid arthritis,

> Rheum Dis Clin North Am

> 21:759, 1995.

> 122.	 Zurier RB, Rossetti RG, Seiler CM, et al.: Human peripheral blood

> T lymphocyte proliferation after activation of the T cell receptor:

> effects of unsaturated fatty acids,

> Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty

> Acids

> 60:371, 1999.

> 123.	 Furse RK, Rossetti RG, Seiler CM, et al.: Oral administration of

> gamma linolenic acid, an unsaturated fatty acid with antiinflam-

> matory properties, modulates interleukin-1

> β

> production by human

> monocytes,

> J Clin Immunol

> 22:83, 2002.

> 124.	 Zurier RB, Rossetti RG, Jacobson EW, et al.: Gamma linolenic

> acid treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, placebo-con-

> trolled trial,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 39(1808), 1996.

> 125.	 Belch JF, Hill A: Evening primrose oil and borage oil in rheumato-

> logic conditions,

> Am J Clin Nutr

> 71:352S, 2000.

> 126.	 Tate G, Mandell BF, Karmali RA, et al.: Suppression of monoso-

> dium urate induced inflammation by diets enriched with gamma-

> linolenic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid,

> Arthritis Rheum

> 31:1543,

> 1988.

> 127.	 Leventhal LG, Boyce EG, Zurier RB: Treatment of rheumatoid

> arthritis with black currant seed oil,

> Br J Rheumatol

> 33:847, 1994.

> 128.	 Reed GW, Leung K, Rossetti RG, et al.: Treatment of rheumatoid

> arthritis with marine and botanical oils: an 18 month, random-

> ized, and double blind trial,

> Evid Based Complement Alternat Med

> 2014:857456, 2014.

> 129.	 Olendzki BC, Leung K, Van Buskirk S, et al.: Treatment of rheu-

> matoid arthritis with marine and botanical oils: influence on serum

> lipids,

> Evid Based Complement Alternat Med

> 2011:827286, 2011.

> 130.	 Yu M, Ives D, Ramesha CS: Synthesis of prostaglandin E2 etha-

> nolamide from anandamide by cyclooxygenase-2,

> J Biol Chem

> 272(34):21181–21186, 1997.

> 131.	 Wartmann M, Campbell D, Subramanian A, Burstein S, Davis RJ:

> The MAP kinase signal transduction pathway is activated by the

> endogenous cannabinoid anandamide,

> FEBS Lett

> 359:133–136,

> 1995.

> 132.	 Kuc C, Audrey Jenkins A, Rukiyah T, Van Dross RT: Arachidonoyl

> ethanolamide (AEA)-Induced apoptosis is mediated by J-series

> prostaglandins and is enhanced by fatty acid amide hydrolase

> (FAAH) blockade,

> Mol Carcinog

> 51:139–149, 2012.

> 133.	 Prusakiewicz JJ, Kingsley PJ, Kozak KR, Marnett LJ: Selective oxy-

> genation of N-arachidonylglycine by cyclooxygenase-2,

> Biochem

> Biophys Res Commun

> 296(3):612–617, 2002.

> 134.	 Burstein S: Ajulemic acid: potential treatment for chronic inflam-

> mation,

> Pharmacol Res Perspect

> 6(2):e00394, 2018.

> 135.	 Leishman E, Murphy MN, Murphy MI, Mackie K, Bradshaw HB:

> Broad and region-specific Impacts of the synthetic cannabinoid CP

> 55,940 in adolescent and adult female mouse brains,

> Front Mol

> Neurosci

> 11:436, 2018.
