# Clinical Research Methods in the Rheumatic Diseases

TITILOLA FALASINNU, AMADEIA RECTOR,
AND JULIA FRIDMAN SIMARD

KEY POINTS

> The first critical decision to make is clarifying the research question.

> The research methods, including choosing data sources, study

> design, analytic considerations, potential bias, and interpretation,

> follow.

> Real-world data sources such as electronic health records,

> administrative claims data, registries, vital status data, patient-

> reported data, wearables, and other digital data are growing and

> have unique methodologic considerations.

> Prevalence is the only appropriate measure of occurrence or disease

> burden in cross-sectional data and is important for priority setting

> and resource allocation in public health. Given that prevalence

> is a function of getting the disease (incidence) and living with

> and surviving it, changes in prevalence do not necessarily reflect

> changes in incidence.

> Incidence reflects new cases or events among a population at risk

> for the outcome being studied. Measures of association such as

> ratio and difference measures can be calculated from incidence

> and prevalence, as well as other measures such as odds and

> rates.

> Study designs include not only the more familiar designs of cross-

> sectional, cohort, and case control but many other alternatives

> including case-only designs to study gene–environment interaction,

> case-crossover for acute triggers, and many types of natural

> experiments. With the growing pool of data sources, some less

> traditional designs may be a good alternative.

> Case-control studies sample on the basis of whether individuals have

> the outcome of interest (case) or not (control) and then examine

> the odds of exposure among cases versus controls (the odds ratio).

> Controls can be sampled in different ways, but importantly their

> sampling should not be related to the exposure of interest as the

> controls.

> Randomized controlled trials are usually viewed as the gold standard

> for many research questions. There are several types of randomized

> controlled trials but note that there are some constraints (e.g., cost,

> ethics) and that even these designs may be subject to some of the

> same concerns for bias as observational studies.

> Confounding, selection bias, and measurement error/misclassification

> are threats to internal validity. These can arise in many different

> study designs, including in prospective cohort studies. Directed

> acyclic graphs are a powerful visual tool that can facilitate

> identification of these biases and inform design and analytic

> choices.

## Data Sources for Research in Rheumatology

The ability to produce, store, and leverage large amounts of health
data has been facilitated by the rapidly increasing use of computers, mobile devices, wearables, and other biosensors in health care
settings.
These data sources are useful for research in rheumatology to answer clinical and research questions, in addition to aiding patient care.
Novel study designs and analytical capabilities
(including artificial intelligence) have also been developed to analyze and apply the large volumes of multidimensional data generated by these devices.
Real-world data (RWD) in medicine refers
to data generated from patient health status and/or during routine health care delivery. Here, we highlight RWD sources such
as electronic health records, administrative claims data, registries,
vital status data, patient-reported data, wearables, and other digital data used for generating real-world evidence in rheumatology.

### Electronic Health Records

Electronic health records (EHRs) have evolved beyond their primary purpose of scheduling and billing patient encounters to serve
a comprehensive range of uses, including clinical documentation
and treatment planning, communication among health care team
members and patients, patient safety and quality improvement,
and clinical research and disease-surveillance activities.
One key
obstacle in using EHRs in understanding the evolution of chronic
diseases such as cancers and rheumatic diseases are the gaps in
the natural history before and after diagnosis, particularly in open
health care systems or referral/specialty care settings. EHRs offer
multidimensional data including demographics, diagnostic codes,
vital signs, medications, procedures, symptomatology, laboratory
tests, clinic notes, and comorbidities. Case ascertainment or combinations of these data elements can be created using computational algorithms, phenotypes, or cohorts of rheumatic diseases,
with varying degrees of accuracy.
Due to the rarity of autoimmune rheumatic diseases such as
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and the nonspecificity of the
initial symptoms of these diseases, creating inception cohorts from
EHR may be often prohibitive.
In recent years, novel findings
such as the association between the Epstein-Barr virus and multiple sclerosis could only have been achieved through linkages of
EHR data to biorepositories that collect longitudinal specimens

from patients across multiple years.
In the future, machine
learning techniques will likely explore disease progression and etiologies (e.g., discovering novel comorbidities), risk predictors, and
prognostic factors for rheumatic diseases using routinely collected
EHR data.

### Administrative Claims Databases

Administrative claims databases (ACDs) are obtained from reimbursement information or payment of bills and consist of some
patient demographics, clinician billing claims, hospital discharge
summaries, procedures, and prescription drug records.
In general,
data elements in ACDs necessary to establish payment/reimbursement tend to be more complete and have less missingness than
other information reported on a claim. In the United States four
major sources of administrative claims data for clinical research in
rheumatology are IBM MarketScan Research Databases, Optum
Insight, Medicaid, and Medicare.
The strengths of ACDs such
as Medicare lies in their volume, generalizability, long follow-up
periods, and the possibility to link to other data sources including census, registries, surveys, and vital records.
However, ACDs
tied to private insurance may have shorter follow-up periods.
Many ACDs may be population based (e.g., an estimated 98%
of adults 65 years and older are enrolled in Medicare), making
Medicare data one of the richest sources of clinical data in the
United States.
There are a few broad limitations of ACDs. Like EHR data,
case ascertainment requires algorithms, the record of care received
may be inconsistent, and details on the duration, subtypes, and
severity of disease may be limited. Unlike EHR, measures such
as blood pressure, body mass index, and smoking status are not
present. In addition, the timing of events may be difficult to ascertain, especially in hospitalization data where time from admission to a given event or timestamps for dates of service may not
be found. The generalizability in ACDs depends on the specific
data, the research question, and the study design. For example,
employment-based or privatized systems such as MarketScan and
Optum Insight may have limited generalizability and individuals
may cycle in and out of enrollment. Follow-up in an ACD may
be fragmented and not linkable. Nonetheless, ACDs are useful for
treatment comparison studies, pharmacoepidemiology, health disparities research, and cost-effective studies in rheumatology.

### Registry Data

One common type of disease registry contains secondary data for
tracking clinical care and outcomes of a defined patient population.
Recently disease registry functionality is available as an
add-on to many EHR systems.
The Rheumatology Informatics
System for Effectiveness (RISE) was developed by the American
College of Rheumatology to help clinicians and researchers optimize patient outcomes. RISE is an EHR-enabled rheumatology
registry in the United States, with more than 1000 clinicians and
2.4 million patients.
Another registry, the Arthritis, Rheumatism and Aging Medical Information System (ARAMIS), is a
National Institutes of Health (NIH)–funded registry to collect
medical records and patient reported outcomes for over 14,000
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis.
Case ascertainment in RISE and ARAMIS is based on classification criteria
or clinician diagnosis, often requiring no validation. Disease subtypes are often well defined in registries; however, comparators
are not available. Patient-reported outcomes and disease-specific
clinical data may be available in registries, including disease activity measures. Laboratory, imaging, procedures, and treatment data
may also be available but might be restricted to disease-related
measures or those captured within the rheumatology visit.
Other valuable registry data exist in several countries or regions,
where population-based data are collected for a range of purposes.
For example, several Scandinavian countries and Canada have registries that collect individual-level data for a myriad of resources
including outpatient care visits, hospitalizations, births, pharmacy
prescriptions, and disease-specific registries focusing on stroke and
cancer.
In many of these regions, individual data can be linked
by a third party to develop a population-based registry data linkage that can be used to answer a myriad of research questions.
There are also registries that serve specific purposes such as postapproval surveillance of biologics and COVID-19 sequelae.

### Vital Statistics Data

In surveillance epidemiology, vital records are important for
describing the health profiles of a population, priority setting for
policymaking, and evaluating the impact of health interventions.
Vital records data (birth and death records) can be linked to EHR,
ACD, and registry data for epidemiologic inference. Death does
not often result from a single cause. When death records are used
without linkage to other sources, multiple causes of death data
can be used to characterize important disease interactions and permits a wide-ranging approach to mortality surveillance. Multiple
causes of death data can be used to explore associations between
different diseases leading to death, thus giving some context to
the overall morbidity process. For example, SLE is associated with
several conditions resulting in an increased risk of death, mainly
renal failure, cardiovascular disease, and infections. Care must be
taken in using vital records alone as they may underestimate the
burden of disease.

### Survey Data

In the United States, several national surveys collect information
on the health and nutritional status of adults and children. The
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey annually collects interviews, physical examinations, and laboratory tests.
The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) is an annual crosssectional household health survey using geographically clustered
sampling techniques to select the sample of households for the
survey.
The sample is designed to collect data that are representative of the U.S. civilian, noninstitutionalized population.
The Medical Expenditures Panel Survey comprises half of the
households sampled in each year’s NHIS and provides nationally
representative data on health care use, expenditures, health insurance coverage, and source of payment for medical care for the
sample individual and household members.
One disadvantage
of survey data is the cross-sectional nature of the data collection,
which precludes any causal interpretation.

### Wearables

The opportunities to capture sensor data continuously and passively in real-world settings with minimal burden are growing
due to the ubiquity of mobile devices, wearable and other biosensors.
Over 80% of adults in the United States own a smartphone;
smartwatches and wearable activity trackers are also widely used
to record physical activity, sleep, and physiology.
For patients

with rheumatic diseases, passive and continuous collection of
digital biomarkers can facilitate real-time monitoring between
medical visits, enabling the extension of coverage and reach of
care.
Digital biomarkers may reflect significant fluctuations
in functional status, symptomatology, quality of life, and risk of
adverse outcomes.
Although the use of digital biomarkers
for clinical research in rheumatology is still in its nascent stages,
there is great potential to measure disease progression to advance
the understanding of how rheumatic diseases and their treatment
affect patients and improve outcomes.

## Measures of Occurrence

Most clinical research is concerned with the ability to quantify the
occurrence of disease (or any other clinical outcome) in populations. There are four entities that need to be defined for measures
of occurrence to be valid. First, in the previous sections, we discussed the contexts or settings. Second, we need to define what is
meant by the case (e.g., a patient or individual in the context who
has the condition or undergoes an event of interest such as pregnancy or death). Cases often compose the numerator. In epidemiologic inquiry, a case definition for a condition may not be the
same as the clinical definition and may change depending on the
context and research question. For example, a case definition for
SLE in an EHR or ACD may include diagnostic codes and specific
medications and a requirement for one or more diagnoses codes
to be given in specialty care or in-patient settings. In a disease
registry, case definition is often more aligned with clinical definition including classification criteria and well-defined subtypes. In
survey data, case definitions are almost always self-reported. Third,
there needs to be a clear definition of the denominator or the population where the cases originated. (The denominator is also called
the population at risk.) Finally, the time under study needs to be
clearly defined. In this section, we discuss prevalence and incidence, the two major measures of occurrence, with emphasis on
how they relate to the clinical context, case definition, the population at risk and the time under study.

### Prevalence

Point prevalence
is defined as the proportion of cases (new and
old) in a population in a single time point and
period prevalence
is
measured over some time. There might be some difficulty in defining the prevalence of rheumatic diseases. The general assumption
in registries is that once an individual is diagnosed with a chronic
disease, they represent a prevalent case until death.
In a study
using an ACD, this may be a problem when case definitions occur
during a time of remission where if a patient has no doctor visits
and no medication use, this case might be missed. Prevalence is
the only appropriate measure of occurrence or disease burden in
cross-sectional data.
These data are important for priority setting
and resource allocation in public health.
If we see an association between a prevalent outcome and exposure, it may be that
the exposure is associated with incident disease, the exposure is
associated with survival with disease, or the disease is associated
with the exposure.

### Incidence

Incidence
is defined as the occurrence (and identification) of new
cases in a population. Incident cases are defined as individuals who progress from nondisease—or from one disease state to
another—and are identified in a specific time interval. For example, in a study of incident cases of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in
2022, only those who developed RA in that year are considered
incident cases. When attempting to define the risk factors or antecedents of a disease or answer causal questions, prevalence is less
useful than incidence (see the section on selection bias). Incidence
may be difficult to estimate in EHR and ACD for different reasons. They are both right and left censored because the observation period starts when a patient is enrolled in a health plan or
first seen in a health system and stops when the patient leaves
the plan or health system.
In EHR, the observation period is
difficult to determine, while in claims data, the plan enrollment
period defines who is under observation during a specific time
interval. For these reasons, prevalence and incidence estimates
from an EHR and ACD may not always align and pose significant
consequences for clinical research.

## Measures of Association

Generally, there are three major ways to measure occurrence of
an event or outcome (e.g., incidence, and to some extent, prevalence): odds, risk, and rate. Here, we present ways to measure associations based on these three entities.

### Risk-Based Measures

Risk is defined as the number of new cases of disease occurring
in a defined population over a given time interval divided by the
number of disease-free individuals in that population at the beginning of the time interval. Risk can also be conceptualized as the
average probability that an individual will develop an outcome/
event during a time interval. It is important to specify the time
under study when measuring risk because the value increases with
longer follow-up duration.
In clinical research, the survival experience of patients with a disease is often measured using risk. Thus
the risk ratio, or relative risk, is calculated as a ratio comparing the
survival experience of two groups on the multiplicative scale.
The risk difference is calculated as an absolute difference comparing the survival experience of two groups on the additive scale
(i.e., risk of the outcome among exposed minus the risk of the
outcome among the unexposed).

### Odds-Based Measures

The odds of an event/outcome is the number of (new) cases of disease arising in a defined population divided in a given time interval divided by the number of individuals who remain disease-free
during that time interval. Odds can also be defined as the ratio of
the probability of getting a disease to the probability of not getting
the disease during a time frame. The odds ratio is calculated as a
ratio comparing the odds of a given event between two groups on
the multiplicative scale.

### Rate-Based Measures

The assumption during the calculation of odds and risk is that
there is complete follow-up for all individuals during the time
interval under study. However, this scenario almost never occurs
in clinical research, as most study populations are dynamic, and
most individuals will not be followed up for the same length of
time. For example, some individuals may only be observed after
the study begins, and some may be lost to follow-up. Neither risk

nor odds takes the time under observation into consideration. In
calculating rates, the numerator is the same as risk; however, the
denominator is the total amount of person-time-at-risk contributed by individuals, measured in days, months, or years. Rate, or
incidence rate, is also called the
incidence density
. The rate ratio is
calculated as a ratio comparing the incidence rates of two groups
on the multiplicative scale (i.e., rate in exposed divided by rate in
the unexposed). The rate difference is calculated as an absolute
difference comparing the incidence rates of two groups on the
additive scale.

## Study Designs

### Observational Studies

Observational studies are defined as studies in which the researcher
does not control the exposure or intervention, often in contrast to
experimental studies. We describe the better-known observational
designs (
Fig. 31.1
) and variations on these including case-only
designs and briefly mention natural experiments.
Ecological studies
use aggregate-level or grouped data to describe
an association between two factors, often reported using a scatter
plot to show how one factor varies by a second factor. These associations are observed at the population or group level and may not
hold up when we look at the same association within individuals
within a group. In other words, if you find the counties that sell
more chocolate have higher rates of gout, this doesn’t necessarily
mean that the people consuming the chocolate are the ones being
diagnosed with gout. This cross-level inference is often referred to
as an
ecological fallacy
. While this is an important consideration
when interpreting ecological study results, this design can be powerful when considering hypothesis-generating work.
If we think of ecological studies as snapshots of aggregated
data,
cross-sectional studies
provide snapshots of individual-level
data at one time point. Surveys are the most common way to collect cross-sectional data. In these designs, exposure and outcome
are often measured at the same time, along with data on additional
factors that may be important confounders or other study variables. These types of studies tend to capture prevalent outcomes or
disease, in contrast to incident outcomes (see “Measures of Occurrence” section). Additionally, because of the emphasis on prevalence, temporality may be a problem and
reverse causation
should
be considered (e.g., disease
exposure).
→

> Exposure (E)

> Disease (D)

> Cross-sectional

> E+ / D+

> Exposure

> E+ / D–

> E– / D+

> Disease

> E– / D–

> Cohort

> E+

> D+

> E–

> D–

> E+

> D+

> Case control

> E–

> D–

> Time

•

*Fig. 31.1*

> Schematic of common study designs.

For many other study designs, some element of temporality
is built into the data and data collection. Frequently studies are
referred to as either prospective or retrospective, and how different researchers define these terms varies. In thinking about how
bias may be introduced and inference affected, we define these
terms as follows focusing on the collection of the data.
Prospective
studies are ones where the exposures are measured before the outcomes have occurred.
Retrospective studies
have exposure measurement/collection after the outcomes have occurred. This is helpful
because the concern with retrospective designs is often that having information about the outcome influences the accuracy (and
misclassification) of the exposure (e.g.,
recall bias
). If the exposure
data are measured before the outcome occurs, then it is unlikely
that knowledge of the outcome by the investigator or the patient
will lead to erroneous exposure data. When thinking about temporality and study design this way, one can conceive of prospective
case-control studies, particularly if they are nested case-control
studies (see below and
Fig. 31.1
).
Cohort studies
are often the simplest transition from experimental studies, except that the exposure is not assigned by the
investigator, unlike in a trial. A group of individuals is defined
by some membership-defining factor (e.g., people with Sjögren’s
syndrome receiving care in 2005 in a specific clinic; individuals
enrolled in a specific health insurance plan; all adults in a specific county). Their exposure status (which can be defined in a
variety of ways: yes/no, quantity, duration, categorical variable)
is identified, and their outcome status is also identified. Although
the study doesn’t have to be conducted in a longitudinal fashion
where the investigator waits for the outcome to occur, there is
time that has passed between the exposure and the outcome. For
example, in a cohort study in an ACD, investigators could identify
all individuals with psoriasis with a specific health plan using an
established International Classification of Diseases code algorithm
combined with other data to examine whether exposure increases
the risk of developing psoriatic arthritis. Put simply, we want to
estimate the effect of an exposure on the occurrence of a particular
outcome during some period of observation. For rare outcomes
the number of individuals in a cohort study will need to be large
and the study period long. If this is not done using secondary data,
this can be costly. However, one big benefit to the cohort design is
that you can follow individuals in the study population for a range
of outcomes, so these can be collected and accrued over time and
yield data to answer a range of questions.
Cohorts may be described as closed versus open. In the
closed
cohort
, once individuals satisfy the membership-defining criteria
to be in the cohort, they are in it (e.g., graduating class of 2022)
and followed over time. In an
open cohort
, individuals may come
in and out of the cohort for a variety of reasons, the study population is dynamic and can change over time, such as with migration.
Because this design is specifically designed to consider an incident
outcome, individuals in the study population must be at risk for
the outcome. If someone could never have the outcome that is
being studied, they should be excluded because regardless of what
their exposure is, they cannot get the outcome (i.e., they are not at
risk for the outcome).
A word of caution:
When exposure is a disease (e.g., studying
whether patients with sarcoidosis have a higher risk of myocardial infarction), people sometimes refer to those with and without
sarcoidosis as cases and controls, respectively. This often leads to
incorrectly assuming that the study is a case-control design when
actually it is a cohort study. As described in more detail below, if a
study like this were to be conducted as a case-control study, then

individuals would be selected on the basis of whether they have an
myocardial infarction or not (cases and controls), and then their
history of sarcoidosis would be assessed as exposure.
The objective with a
case-control study
is similar, that is, estimating the effect of an exposure on some outcome; however, this
design samples the study population differently. Individuals are
selected based on whether they have (or have had) the outcome
(cases) or not (controls) and their exposure information is collected. Although this may sound like a retrospective study, casecontrol studies do not have to be retrospective. Exposure can be
assessed in a variety of ways, ranging from self-report to documentation, and then the odds of exposure in the cases is compared
with the odds of exposure in the controls. Often it is helpful to
think about a case-control being derived from a larger (potentially
hypothetical) underlying cohort. When this hypothetical cohort is
real, we refer to this as a
nested case-control study.
Cases may be identified in a variety of ways, including in
registers, using surveillance work, by self-report, or captured in
administrative data. Controls, however, present a larger challenge.
Their purpose is to provide a valid estimate of the distribution
of exposure in the underlying base from which the cases arise.
Therefore control selection should generally be independent of
exposure. There are two primary sampling approaches: cumulative
incidence sampling and risk set sampling.
Cumulative incidence
sampling
selects controls from the population at the end of followup from the subset of individuals left at risk for the outcome. This
may be more feasible depending on what data are available, but
an important caveat to consider is that the group of individuals
left at the end of the study period without having the event may
be systematically different from the full “at-risk” population. For
instance, those who are lost to follow-up or drop out are not eligible to be sampled as controls, and the attrition of the population
may be informative.
Risk set sampling
(also called
incidence density
sampling
) samples controls when a case becomes a case and, as
such, requires longitudinal data where person-time can be enumerated. Because controls are sampled as a function of persontime, or sometimes described as matched on time, the probability
of being selected is proportional to an individual’s person-time
in the study base. Additionally, in risk set sampling an individual
who is selected as a control at one time can later be chosen as a
control again for another case, as well as go on to become a case in
the future (see
Fig. 31.2
).
Aside from the logistics of how controls are sampled, there are
also considerations about the source of the controls. When cases
and controls are sampled from a pre-existing cohort (i.e., a nested
case-control study), this is more straightforward. Outside of this

> Cumulative incidence sampling

•

*Fig. 31.2*

> Schematic representing two common control sampling methods in case-control study designs.

some sources may include population registers, neighborhoods,
friends and family, and health care settings such as hospitals.
Keeping in mind two questions is often helpful to think about
the controls: Would these individuals be captured as a case in my
study if they were to develop the outcome of interest? and Is the
sampling of these controls independent of exposure? One of the
most common criticisms of case-control studies is that there may
be recall bias (e.g., differential misclassification of exposure, see
the section on information bias).
Because individuals are sampled on the basis of having the outcome or not, the case-control design is appropriate for studying
one outcome, although data on multiple exposures can be assessed
(although this may get complicated quickly because sampling of
controls should be independent of exposure, and the more exposures considered, the more challenging it is to do this). When the
outcome is rare, this design can be particularly efficient.
The
case-cohort design
can be thought of as another variant of a
case-control study, but instead the controls (referred to as a subcohort) are randomly sampled at the start of follow-up from the
entire study population. Everyone is followed up for the outcome,
and the subcohort also has all of the exposure assessments. It is
possible that individuals in the subcohort may go on to become
cases, and different analytic approaches have been proposed to
analyze these types of study designs.
Some other, less commonly used designs, include a couple of
case-only designs, such as those for studying gene–environment
interactions and the case-crossover design. When conducting a
case-only study
to evaluate gene–environment interaction, investigators can estimate the association between environmental exposure and genotype but cannot assess the main effects of either the
environmental exposure or the genotype. This approach assumes
that these two are independent in the underlying source population and, by not including controls, are not subject to the concerns
and corresponding biases and challenges of selecting controls. In a
case-crossover study
, each case serves as their own control, whereby
for each case, different time periods are selected as control periods. This is a particularly useful design when studying potential
triggers of acute events. The control periods can be selected a
number of ways, and therefore correspond to different types of
analysis.
When using a pair-matched interval approach, a single
time period is compared (perhaps the 24 hours before the onset of
the event). It is also possible to use a multiple-intervals approach
where several time periods are assessed before the onset of the
event. Lastly, the usual frequency approach may gather data on
patterns of exposure during a longer time period (the past month
or past year).

> Risk-set sampling (Incidence density sampling)

Natural experiments
often leverage unplanned events where
some populations may be divided into exposed and unexposed
subsets (or this could be based on the outcome). The 1854 Broad
Street cholera outbreak in London, where the exposure to polluted
water was not due to personal choice nor investigator control, is
a classic example. When designing and analyzing natural experiments, there are several methodological approaches to choose
from, some more familiar (like regression adjustment and propensity scores) and others more commonly seen in fields like economics (i.e., differences-in-differences and instrumental variables). A
simple and intuitive approach may be comparing pre- and postmeasurements to examine how outcomes change before and after
some intervention has been applied.
Differences-in-differences builds on this and compares whether
there is a change in outcome among those who were newly
exposed to some intervention with those who remain unexposed.
Synthetic control designs identify and create a weighted comparator with similar trends where the intervention is not implemented
to compare with a region where the intervention occurred.

## Clinical Trial Considerations

Clinical trial design and methodology warrants a separate in-depth
discussion. Here we briefly touch on a few general principles and
considerations. Often people first think of double-blinded randomized controlled trials, but this is just one type (with many
subtypes). First, trials can be blinded or unblinded, meaning that
the participant is or is not aware of the treatment to which they
have been assigned. In the case of double-blinded, both the participant and the investigator are unaware of the treatment assignment. Second, trials can be randomized or not. In nonrandomized
trials, participants or the investigators may assign or choose the
treatment. In the setting of randomization, one of several randomization techniques can be used to randomly assign participants to
one of the treatment arms, which theoretically should yield more
comparable groups that do not systematically differ. As a result,
there is less concern about potential bias due to confounding, for
example.
Three types of trials are commonly seen in the literature, superiority, equivalence, and noninferiority, to examine how a treatment
of interest compares to a control treatment (which may be placebo, standard of care, or something else). As their names imply,
superiority trials
assess whether the intervention or treatment of
interest is better than the control;
equivalence trials
test whether
the intervention or treatment is equivalent (i.e., neither better nor
worse) than the control; and
noninferiority trials
assess whether the
intervention is not worse than the specified control. How the null
hypothesis is specified varies for each
and, as described, answers
different research questions. Considerations such as costs, drug
availability, or side effects can influence why one approach may be
chosen over another.
Clinical trials commonly compare at least two treatment arms.
Defining the comparison (treatment intervention vs. control with
two arms) is critical. Control arms often include either a placebo
or standard of care. There is considerable discussion in the theory
and ethics of trials about whether placebo-controlled trials are
appropriate when there is an effective treatment available. Providing a placebo, in those settings, may be perceived as withholding treatment, and hence leads to important ethical discussions.
Also, investigators must contend with whether it is valuable to
know if something is better than nothing or if something is better than the current standard of care (such as methotrexate in
RA or allopurinol for gout), or another not-yet standard-of-care
alternative. These critical discussions are outside the scope of this
chapter but warrant careful consideration. Furthermore, many trials may allow for background standard-of-care treatment to continue, with some constraints. How this might influence the trial
and what constraints to set around these needs to also be carefully
considered so that poor response in one arm is not masked by
background modification of corticosteroids, for example.
How individuals are identified and what is measured needs careful specification. Determining the study population—for example,
what inclusion and exclusion criteria to employ, recruitment, and
representativeness—is critical. Classification criteria for a range
of rheumatologic conditions are frequently incorporated into the
inclusion criteria. Contraindications of either treatment, stability
of current disease, history of specific manifestation, concomitant
medications, and more must all be factored into these decisions.
They influence the risks, the variability of your study population,
and your generalizability; this includes sufficient recruitment of
participants of different sexes, ages, and race/ethnicities, for example. We and others have shown that the trial populations for a
number of rheumatologic diseases do not reflect the demographic
composition of the patient population.
Outcomes measures
in clinical trials may vary, but there is a strong preference (and
in many cases, requirements) for validated endpoint measures
(see
Chapter 33
) such as disease activity indices, ACR response
measures, or serologic measures. Additional outcomes, sometimes
considered as secondary, include patient-reported outcomes such
as the NIH Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS®;
www.nihpromis.org
), which measures a
range of health-related quality-of-life domains such as physical
functioning, sleep, depression, and self-efficacy.

## Common Sources of Bias

### Selection Bias

Selection bias is simply defined as when the study population that
one is analyzing and drawing inferences on does not represent
the population one intended to analyze. Although there are some
aspects of selection bias that people are more familiar with (e.g.,
healthy worker effect), there are other, less commonly known
sources. Individuals who are healthier (or sicker, depending on
the study) may be more likely to be studied or volunteer to participate. It is important to note that selection bias isn’t only about
how people are selected or included in the study but also can be a
consequence of how they are retained (or even survive).
In cross-sectional studies nonparticipation among some subgroups may lead to selection bias. Also, prevalence/incidence bias,
as discussed briefly, can result in selection bias. Given that being
captured as a prevalent case of some disease is a function of getting
the disease and living with and surviving it, one important consideration is incidence/prevalence bias. For example, if you find
that exposure is associated with a higher prevalence of outcome it
might be that this exposure is associated with getting the disease
or being able to live with and survive the disease. In cohort studies, nonresponse and potentially unrepresentative groups can yield
selection bias and attrition of the population. One well-known
type of this bias is called the
depletion of susceptibles
, whereby individuals who are most susceptible to specific outcomes may be lost
early. In case-control studies, both case and control selection can
lead to selection bias. One common source of this bias in control
selection is when conducting a matched case-control study where

it is common to match on something believed to be a confounder.
We know that confounders are associated with the outcome and
with the exposure and, as a result, when matching on a confounder, controls are not selected independent of the exposure. In
essence, controls are selected with the same value of the matching
factor/confounder as the case, and that also means that they are
more similar with respect to the exposure of interest. This selection bias in control selection in the matching leads to bias toward
the null because the cases and controls are forced to be more similar with respect to the exposure. If analyzed crudely, a bias toward
the null will occur; however, stratifying by the matching factors
will counter this bias.
A paper was published using directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
to illustrate a common structural relationship between factors that
yield selection bias. In short, what the authors showed was that
selection bias can also arise in the setting of collider stratification
bias, where the collider is a consequence of exposure. A similar
underlying DAG structure was common across several types of
selection bias. For further reading, we recommend the following
reference: 50. We provide a brief primer on DAGs later in the
chapter (
Fig. 31.3
).

### Information Bias

Information bias is another frequently discussed source of bias,
which many refer to when discussing either measurement error
or misclassification. Measurement error is frequently used when
discussing a continuous variable, and misclassification is used to
refer to information bias in the setting of a categorical or binary
variable. This type of error can occur at any phase of a study ranging from how an instrument is designed, poor execution of study

> What is a DAG?

> • Visual representation of the proposed causal relationship between an

> exposure/risk factor and outcome often used in epidemiologic and clinical research

> • Directed – arrows imply directionality (causality and/or temporal relationship)

> • Acyclic – no closed cycle; a variable cannot be its own cause

> • Graph – visualization of the exposure-outcome relationship

> Basic components of a DAG

> • Exposure, risk factor, or predictor (X)

> • Outcome (Y)

> • Confounding variable(s) (Z)

> • Effect modifier(s) (L)

> What is the purpose of a DAG?

> • Draw out the hypothesized or known relationship between the exposure and outcome

> • Identify potential bias, such as confounding (51,52)

> • Detect spurious relationships between the exposure and outcomes using the rules

> of d-separation (52)

> Note: The proposal in (c) is not accepted by all as a way to illustrate effect

> modification, but is a modification to DAGs that some have introduced.

> For a more in-depth explanation of d-separation and how DAGs can identify backdoor

> paths, see appendix at https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/155/2/176/108106.

•

*Fig. 31.3*

> A primer on directed acyclic graphs (DAGs).

protocols, to individual subject limitations such as memory or
social desirability, to errors that may occur in data entry or how
covariates are defined. Furthermore, no variable is exempt from
being at risk for this type of bias, whether it’s the exposure, outcome, confounder, or another variable of interest. When conducting research, it is important to consider what sources of data may
be available for different factors to strive to minimize misclassification and measurement error.
When discussing information bias, it is common to refer to it as
differential or nondifferential.
Differential
, or systematic, misclassification means that the way in which the error is arising is not
random and depends on some other parameter. A common type of
differential misclassification that is discussed in the literature is
recall
bias
, where the reliability of an individual’s report of their exposure,
for example, is related to whether they have the outcome.
Differential misclassification can bias in either direction
(toward or away from the null).
Nondifferential misclassification
means that the measurement or classification is not related to
other variables. Many people state that nondifferential misclassification of exposure or outcome biases associations toward the
null, but it is important to note that this is not always true, particularly when you have nonbinary factors being studied. Numerous analytic techniques exist to address and attempt to correct
analyses for misclassification using data from validation studies.
Some advanced methods may leverage probabilistic bias analysis
(discussed next).

### Confounding

Randomized control trials randomize the participant pool and
assign the intervention irrespective of participant characteristics.

Randomization tends to balance the characteristics of participants
equally among the intervention arms, making the exposed and
unexposed more similar and reducing potential bias produced by
confounding. However, most clinical research is conducted using
observational data owing to issues of feasibility and ethics, and
thus there will be confounding, or a mixing of effects other than
the effect we wish to study, among other biases.
Therefore, it is
important to assess for and manage confounding in observational
data to isolate the effectiveness or harmful effects of interventions,
behaviors, practices, or conditions.
Confounding is a source of bias in nonrandomized studies that
distorts the perceived association between the exposure or predictor of interest and the outcome or disease due to the presence
or absence of a third factor. To be considered a confounder, the
variable must be independently associated with the exposure, a
risk factor for the outcome, and cannot be on the causal pathway
between the exposure and outcome (i.e., the variable cannot be an
intermediate or an effect of the exposure).
Types of Confounding
Measured confounders
should be identified a priori and measured in the collected data. If the measured confounder is
improperly measured or not entirely representative of the confounding variable, then this will result in
residual confounding
.
Most studies will have residual confounding because it
is highly unlikely that variables will be perfectly measured.
When the observed effect (i.e., the relative risk is close to 1, a
null effect) is weak, residual confounding is most problematic
as it may obscure an association or create a spurious association.
Unmeasured confounding
results from variables that are
not measured, either because of feasibility issues in collecting
the data (“known unknown”) or knowledge gaps giving way to
unknown confounders (“unknown unknown”).
Unlike measured variables, we cannot adjust for unmeasured variables,
although some approaches for addressing unmeasured confounding exist. It is common to have unmeasured confounding
in studies that employ medical claims data because these data
were collected for billing purposes initially and not for clinical research.
This is particularly true for modifiable behavior variables such as smoking, alcohol consumption, or diet
or variables capturing facets of a disease such as disease activity, severity, or particular phenotypes.
Observational studies
investigating the effect of therapeutics are prone to channeling
bias, which occurs when physicians preferentially prescribe a
treatment based on the patient’s prognosis or patients of particular baseline characteristics opt to take a medication. In other
words, there is “channeling” of interventions toward patients
with similar underlying characteristics, such as patients with
more advanced disease or shared comorbidities.
Confounding
by indication
is a type of channeling bias that occurs when the
indication for the intervention is associated with the outcome.
Thus it is difficult to isolate the causal effect of an intervention because it becomes unclear what the effect of the intervention is on the outcome versus the effect of the indication
on the outcome. For example, a late-entry drug is more likely
to be prescribed to patients with intractable disease who have
already tried other regimens; in turn, these patients have more
severe disease and are therefore at higher risk for developing
the outcome.
Patients with RA who have higher levels of disease activity and
uncontrolled disease and/or high inflammation will be more likely
to get started on tumor necrosis factor inhibitor (TNFi) therapy,
which reduces inflammation.
Disease activity is a confounder

> Disease activity

> TNF inhibitor therapy

> Infection

•

*Fig. 31.4*

> Confounding by indication.

and represents an indication for which therapy is initiated (
Fig.
31.4
).
Assessing for Confounding
Confounding may be present if the association of a treatment or
exposure with an outcome is due to the effect of other factors on
the outcome. The effect of confounding may distort the association and result in an over- or underestimation of the causal effect.
Therefore it is important when investigating a research question
to establish plausibility for the causal association between the
predictor(s) of interest and the outcome (e.g., Bradford-Hill criteria).
In epidemiologic practice, identifying confounders relies
on subject-matter expertise and checking to see if the definition of
a confounder is met (or identifying a common cause in a DAG).
We describe some common approaches that are used; however,
we caution individuals to consider selecting confounding variables
a priori informed by subject-matter knowledge and using a DAG.
This is because some other types of bias or factors in the data may
lead to changes in the estimate that are unrelated to confounding
(and may introduce bias). Comparisons of these approaches have
been discussed in depth elsewhere.
Some statistical approaches that are used to determine whether
there may be confounding rely on comparing adjusted and unadjusted estimates. The adjusted estimates of the association can be
from a multivariable adjusted model or, if we stratify on levels of
confounder variables, we could calculate a summary measure pooling
the stratum-specific measures of association; this is another type of
adjusted effect measure. The Cochran Mantel Haenszel procedure is
one of the ways in which this summary measure may be obtained.
While there is no statistical test for confounding, the rule of thumb is
that a change-in-estimate or magnitude of confounding greater than
or equal to 10% in crude effect measure compared with adjusted effect
measure is indicative of confounding.
The equation below estimates
the change-in-estimate in relative risk (RR) or odds ratio (OR).


| RR
RR
|
Magnitude of confounding
100


RR

For example, if our crude RR = 1.05 but our adjusted RR =
2.01, then we may say that there is confounding given that the
change-in-estimate, equal to approximately 91%, is greater than
10%. As another example, comparing crude and adjusted effect
measures from a study on serious infection risk after 1 year for
patients with RA treated with rituximab or with a second TNFi,
the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) versus the crude or unadjusted HR,
shows little difference. This was observed for the whole cohort
and in their sensitivity analysis, restricting to the time period after
2007. Thus we might assess this as no confounding by age and
gender or the variables adjusted for by the inverse probability of
treatment weighted method. However, we would still report the
adjusted values since these confounders were specified a priori and
on base knowledge.
Some rely on statistical methods such as automatic selection
procedures like stepwise selection or regression, which will add
or remove variables based on an improvement of fit that is statistically significant.
These approaches may cultivate a set of
explanatory variables that satisfy some statistical criteria, but these

are not necessarily confounders; moreover, this method is mired
by biased estimates.
Dealing With Confounding
Whether we have measured or unmeasured confounding (admittedly more challenging), there are various ways to limit or remove
confounding at the design and analysis stage of a study.
Randomization
is an aspect of design that attempts to minimize
confounding through balancing confounders among the treatment and control group in a randomized control trial.
Using
blocked randomization, we can use the measured baseline characteristics of participants to block or group by particular characteristics to estimate a subgroup effect while randomizing at this level
to control for confounding.
We can limit the confounding effect of measured variables
in observational studies at the design stage through the use of
restriction/specification or matching.
Restriction
limits the study
to patients in some strata of the confounder, such as limiting a
study to women or a specific age group. Restriction is generally
limited to few variables, as a lot of restriction results in smaller
sample size and consequently reduces power.
Individuals can
be sampled into a study population by
matching
on potential prespecified confounders. For example, cases that are age-matched
to controls eliminate or reduce the effect of age on estimating the
causal effect.
Commonly, frequency matching, where multiple individuals are matched to one individual, is employed to
preserve power. If matching is incomplete, this can lead to bias.
In the analysis phase, confounding can be dealt with through
means of stratification, propensity scores, multivariable adjustment, instrumental variable(s), marginal structural models, or sensitivity analyses. Most commonly, analyses will either be stratified
by the confounder or include the confounder(s) in multivariable
adjusted regression models.
Propensity scores
, which are calculated
using logistic regression to estimate how likely each individual is
to be exposed based on the distribution of their baseline characteristics (suspected confounders) or prior information,
can be
incorporated a number of ways: models, matching, stratification,
and weighting. Propensity score methods are useful for tackling
bias from confounding by indication because they may control
for characteristics related to disease activity, which confound the
association between use of a therapy and disease outcome. A variety of studies parsing the effects of therapy in patients with rheumatic diseases have employed propensity score methods,
and a
review by one group
enumerates the various applications of propensity score methods for rare diseases such as systemic sclerosis.
Propensity scores may balance the measured covariates, but there
is no guarantee that they will balance unmeasured or unadjusted
factors (although they may to some extent depending on the correlation between the measured and unmeasured factors).
Marginal structural models
are useful in longitudinal data as
they can address time-varying confounders through use of inverse
probability weighting methods, such as the time-varying use of
anti-TNF treatment among patients with RA as shown in
Fig.
31.4
.
Inverse probability of treatment weights (IPTW)
are closely
related to propensity scores, but instead of estimating how likely
each individual is made known to the exposure of interest, IPTW
are based on an estimate of how likely each individual is to be
exposed to the exposure that they had.
Although little discussed
here, these types of methods are important to estimate associations
in the presence of time-varying confounding where a confounder
can also be an intermediate variable. Extending the simple confounding by indication DAG, one study used these methods to
account for this complex confounding structure to estimate the

> Confounders

> Exposure

> Outcome

> Instrumental

> variable

•

*Fig. 31.5*

> Simplified illustration of instrumental variable.

association between TNFi initiation in RA and infection.
Disease activity and concomitant medications influence choice of
medication, and whether medications are or are not initiated, disease activity (and possibly the need for additional therapeutics)
changes. Over time this will influence the use of medication on
the next visit, and so it goes. If disease activity and concomitant
medications like corticosteroids are also associated with infection,
then time-varying confounding arises. These types of models are
no longer estimating the association between exposure and outcome on the basis of comparing the exposed to the unexposed,
but instead use baseline characteristics, suspected confounders,
and other factors to create a pseudostudy population where the
model estimates what would have happened to the entire study
population had they been exposed compared with what would
have happened to the entire study population had they not been
exposed (in other words, estimating the counterfactual).
With
instrumental variable (IV)
analysis the estimation of the
exposure–outcome association shifts to studying the association
between the instrument and the outcome. An IV, or instrument,
is causally associated with the exposure, affects the outcome only
through exposure, and is not associated with known or unknown
confounders of the exposure–outcome association (
Fig. 31.5
).
Through its effect on the exposure, it may be substituted for the
study’s main exposure (if the exposure is particularly difficult to capture) and achieve better control for confounding and result in less
bias.
Some instruments that you might be familiar with include
policy or other ecologic parameters, randomized treatment assignment in a trial, or specific genotype in the setting of mendelian
randomization.
Identifying an instrument can be challenging,
and if a weak instrument is chosen then estimates may be biased.
Additional methods such as
probabilistic bias analysis (PBA)
can
be used to address unmeasured confounding and imputation of
incomplete data leading to missing data in a confounder.
One
study estimating the incidence of lung disease in patients with
SLE employed PBA in a sensitivity analysis to account for potential unmeasured confounding by smoking
(
Fig. 31.5
).
Another tool, the application of a
negative control
, may be used
to detect bias such as confounding. A negative control can be
applied to the exposure or the outcome and, though more common in biologic sciences, it is gaining more attention in epidemiology. For example, when applying to an exposure, a negative
control would be a variable that is not associated with the outcome of interest but may share common traits with the exposure,
and thus it may be these shared traits that explain an apparent
effect or lack of effect as opposed to the exposure alone.
Sensitivity analyses
can include quantifying the effect that a possible
unmeasured confounder could have on the observed effect. The
purpose is to investigate how sensitive the association between the
exposure and outcome is to unmeasured confounding variables.
Probabilistic bias analysis, already described briefly, is considered
a type of sensitivity analysis that specifies parameters of bias and
calculates the resulting adjusted effect measure associated with
pre-specified assumed degrees of bias.

## Effect Measure Modification, Interaction, and Heterogeneity

Effect (measure) modification occurs when the association under
study differs by subgroups of a variable; or, in other words, the
effect of the exposure on the outcome is heterogeneous based on
levels of a third variable.
This can manifest in a variety of ways,
be it some significant and some not significant associations, associations in the same direction but of different magnitude
(quantitative)
, or associations in different directions
(qualitative)
. For
example, if studying the association between TNFi use and infections it was found that the relative risk was 3.0 in female patients
but only 1.2 in male patients, we may conclude that there is likely
effect modification by sex.
Effect modification and interaction are often used interchangeably, but the distinction is that effect modification represents
asymmetry between the exposure and the effect modifier, meaning
that the effect of one intervention or exposure varies across strata
of the effect modifier. In contrast, interaction represents symmetry between the exposure and the third variable, meaning the two
interventions or exposures have a joint effect in addition to a sepaAs an example of biologic
rate, individual effect on the outcome.
interaction, patients with RA that smoke tend to respond poorly
to anti-TNF treatment, so it has been proposed that smoking may
affect the bioavailability of anti-TNF treatment (i.e., the effect of
smoking negatively interacts with the effect of the treatment).
In contrast, sex may be an example of effect modification, where
the effects of a drug may differ by sex.
Unlike confounding,
effect modification and interaction can be statistically measured.
One of the ways for testing for effect modification is by way of the
Breslow-day test for homogeneity, which assesses whether the differences in strata by a third variable are statistically different from
each other.
If effect modification is present, the appropriate way
to display results is to stratify by the effect modifier.
Biologic interaction (see
Fig. 31.6
) is assessed through effect
measures on the multiplicative scale (i.e., RR, OR, HR) as well as
on the additive scale (i.e., risk difference, also known as attributable risk.

Evaluating biological interaction

> Additive scale

> Effect measures: risk difference (RD) also known as

> atributable risk (AR)

> Observed joint effect = Expected joint effect

> No interaction

> Observed joint effect > Expected joint effect

> Synergistic

> Observed joint effect < Expected joint effect

> Antagonistic

> Where expected joint effect:

> Expected RR

> = Observed RR

> - Observed RR

> Expected OR

> = Observed OR

> - Observed OR

•

*Fig. 31.6*

> Evaluating biologic interaction.

Applying notation from one group,
we examine the interaction of two dichotomous risk factors, presented here as
i
and
j
, by
estimating the RRs for when
i
and
j
are both present and comparing them to the expected RR. There are four exposure scenarios
to consider: (1)
i
is present but
j
is absent, (2)
j
is present but
i
is
absent, (3) both
i
and
j
are present, or (4) neither
i
nor
j
is present.
In the event of biologic interaction, the presence of both
risk factors would result in an effect either greater (synergistic)
or smaller (antagonistic) than the effect of just one of the risk
factors alone. If
i
= 1 when
i
is present and 0 otherwise and
j
=
1 when
j
is present and 0 otherwise, the relative risks, RR
, for
the four exposure categories are RR
, RR
, RR
, and RR
,
where the reference group (RR
) is set as absence of both
i
and
j
exposures. On the multiplicative scale, if there are no joint
effects or biologic interaction, then the observed relative risk
when both risk factors are present, RR
, should be equal to
the product of the relative risks for when only one risk factor
is present, RR
* RR
, known as the expected joint effect.
Interaction is present on the multiplicative scale if the observed
joint effect is either greater (synergistic) or lesser (antagonistic)
than the expected joint effect. In the case of logistic regression, we substitute ORs for RRs. On the additive scale, we may
calculate the relative excess risk due to interaction, RERI (
Fig.
31.6
).
If the RERI = 0, then there is no biologic interaction, but RERI > 1 indicates a positive interaction or synergistic effect and RERI < 1 is an antagonistic effect or negative
interaction. It is important to assess for interaction on both
the additive and multiplicative scales as interaction may be
present on one scale but not the other.
For further in-depth
reading on how to assess and present biologic interaction and
effect modification, we direct readers to the works of multiple
groups
(
Fig. 31.6
).

## Surveillance and Screening

Public health surveillance, considered the cornerstone of public
health, is the “
…
systematic, ongoing collection, management,
analysis, and interpretation of data followed by the dissemination

> Multiplicative scale

> Effect measures: relative risk, odds ratio, hazards ratio

> RERI = 0

> No interaction

> RERI > 1

> Synergistic

> RERI < 1

> Antagonistic

> Where RERI:

> RERI = Observed RR

> - Observed RR

> - Observed RR

> + 1

> RERI = Observed OR

> - Observed OR

> - Observed OR

> + 1

of these data to public health programs to stimulate public
health action.”
Since 2004, the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention has funded five population-based cohort studies of patients with SLE. The goal of the cohorts is to follow the
natural and treated history of lupus. Each site uses similar active
surveillance methods to estimate the incidence and prevalence of
lupus.
However, estimates of the burden of disease rely on accurate case definitions. In an EHR and ACD, case definitions or
computational phenotypes for rheumatic diseases often combine
diagnostic codes and prescriptions. One cannot study the effects
of elements that comprise a particular phenotype. For example, if
a rheumatic disease phenotype includes prescriptions, researchers
may be limited in how they study the effect or trends of prescriptions using that phenotype. The gold standard used in case definitions is usually the judgment of clinicians based on the “synthesis
of medical history details beyond
…
classification criteria.”
Here, we describe measures used to determine which case
definitions are most accurate in clinical research. These frequently arise in validation studies, which are important to
ensure that we are capturing what we intend to capture when
we define exposure, outcomes, or other factors of interest.
Sensitivity
refers to the proportion of people who truly have an
identified outcome, whether it be due to a computational phenotype or self-report. For example, a computational phenotype
with high sensitivity will have few false-negative results, thus
fewer patients with the disease are missed.
Specificity
refers to
the appropriate designation of a patient without the disease
as negative. A computational phenotype with high specificity
will have few false-positive results. The
positive predictive value
of a computational algorithm or test is the probability that a
patient meeting the case definition or testing positive has the
disease. The
negative predictive value
is the probability that a
person who does not meet the case definition is disease-free.
The goal is to identify a definition (whether it be a test, question, or computational algorithm) that provides the highest
positive predictive value, highest sensitivity, and highest specificity to minimize false positives, exclude true negatives, and
identify as many cases as possible.

## Conclusion

Epidemiology and clinical research methods offer a wide range
of approaches to answer important clinical and public health
questions. Identifying answerable research questions is the first
important step, which dictates and informs a myriad of choices
from appropriate design, type of data, outcome measures, analysis, and interpretation. DAGs facilitate making assumptions
more explicit and provide a visual tool to potential sources of
bias, which can be used to consider both the design and analysis
of data. Bias can arise from random and nonrandom sources,
including how the study population is identified and retained
over the study period, how factors are measured, what is missing, and more. Many sophisticated analytic methods strive to
address these problems, such as propensity scores, instrumental variables, matching, and statistical adjustment, but some
threats to validity can be effectively minimized in the design
phase of a study as well. Novel study design and methods, such
as probabilistic bias analysis, are gaining popularity in addressing unmeasured confounding and misclassification.

The references for this chapter can also be found on Elsevier
eBooks+.

## References

> 1.	 Food and Drug Administration.

> Real-World Evidence [Internet]

> .

> [cited 2022 Dec 7]. Available from:

> https://www.fda.gov/science-

> research/science-and-research-special-topics/real-world-evidence

> .

> 2.	 Balogh E, Amankwah F, Wizemann T, Nass S, editors: National

> Cancer Policy Forum, Board on Health Care Services, Computer

> Science and Telecommunications Board, Division on Engineering

> and Physical Sciences, Health and Medicine Division, National

> Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Innovation in

> electronic health records for oncology care, research, and surveil-

> lance [Internet], Washington, D.C., 2022, National Academies

> Press. Available from:

> https://www.nap.edu/catalog/26720

> .

> 3.	 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Health

> and Medicine Division, Division on Engineering and Physical

> Sci, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Board on

> Health Care Services, et al. Innovation in Electronic Health Records

> for Oncology Care, Research, and Surveillance: Proceedings of a

> Workshop. National ACADEMY Press; 2023.

> 4.	 Barnado A, Casey C, Carroll RJ, Wheless L, Denny JC, Crofford

> LJ: Developing electronic health record algorithms that accurately

> identify patients with systemic lupus erythematosus,

> Arthritis Care

> Res

> 69(5):687–693, 2017.

> 5.	 Knevel R, Liao KP: From real-world electronic health record data to

> real-world results using artificial intelligence,

> Ann Rheum Dis [Internet]

> ,

> 2022.

> 6.	 Carroll RJ, Thompson WK, Eyler AE, Mandelin AM, Cai T, Zink

> RM, et al.: Portability of an algorithm to identify rheumatoid arthri-

> tis in electronic health records,

> J Am Med Inform Assoc

> 19(e1):e162–

> e169, 2012.

> 7.	 Bjornevik K, Cortese M, Healy BC, Kuhle J, Mina MJ, Leng Y, et al.:

> Longitudinal analysis reveals high prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus

> associated with multiple sclerosis,

> Science

> 375(6578):296–301, 2022.

> 8.	 Chaganti S, Welty VF, Taylor W, Albert K, Failla MD, Cascio C,

> et al.: Discovering novel disease comorbidities using electronic medi-

> cal records,

> PLoS One

> 14(11):e0225495, 2019.

> 9.	 Hudson M, Tascilar K, Suissa S: Comparative effectiveness research

> with administrative health data in rheumatoid arthritis,

> Nat Rev

> Rheumatol

> 12(6):358–366, 2016.

> 10.	 Ogdie A, Rozycki M, Arndt T, Shi C, Kim N, Hur P: Longitudinal

> analysis of the patient pathways to diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis,

> Arthritis Res Ther

> 23(1):252, 2021.

> 11.	 Wassif H, Saad M, Desai R, Hajj-Ali RA, Menon V, Chaudhury P,

> et al.: Outcomes following acute coronary syndrome in patients with

> and without rheumatic immune-mediated inflammatory diseases,

> J

> Am Heart Assoc

> 11(18):e026411, 2022.

> 12.	 Burns SM, Woodworth TS, Icten Z, Honda T, Manjourides J: A

> machine learning approach to identify predictors of severe COVID-

> 19 outcome in patients with rheumatoid arthritis,

> Pain Physician

> 25(8):593–602, 2022.

> 13.	 Bharat A, Xie F, Baddley JW, Beukelman T, Chen L, Calabrese L,

> et al.: Incidence and risk factors for progressive multifocal leuko-

> encephalopathy among patients with selected rheumatic diseases,

> Arthritis Care Res

> 64(4):612–615, 2012.

> 14.	 ResDAC KC:

> Research data assistance center

> , 2019.

> 15.	 University of Minnesota, School of Public Health, Health Policy &

> Management. Strengths and Limitations of CMS Administrative

> Data in Research [Internet]. Research Data Assistance Center. [cited

> 2022 Dec 7]. Available from:

> https://resdac.org/articles/strengths-

> and-limitations-cms-administrative-data-research

> .

> 16.	 Deodhar A, Kruzikas D, Zhou L, Biljan A, Saffore CD: Geographic

> variations in diagnosis and treatment of ankylosing spondylitis in the

> United States: a real-world study,

> Rheumatol Ther

> 9(2):447–463, 2022.

> 17.	 Kievit W, Adang EM, Fransen J, Kuper HH, van de Laar MAFJ, Jansen

> TL, et al.: The effectiveness and medication costs of three anti-tumour

> necrosis factor alpha agents in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis

> from prospective clinical practice data,

> Ann Rheum Dis

> 67(9):1229–

> 1234, 2008.

> 18.	 Chandler MT, Santacroce LM, Costenbader KH, Kim SC, Feld-

> man CH: Racial differences in persistent glucocorticoid use patterns

> among medicaid beneficiaries with incident systemic lupus erythe-

> matosus,

> Semin Arthritis Rheum

> 58:152122, 2022.

> 19.	 Hua Y, Salcedo J: Cost-effectiveness analysis of robotic-arm assisted

> total knee arthroplasty,

> PLoS One

> 17(11):e0277980, 2022.

> 20.	 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Computerized Disease

> Registries [Internet]. Digital Healthcare Research. [cited 2022 Dec

> 7]. Available from:

> https://digital.ahrq.gov/computerized-disease-

> registries

> .

> 21.	 Yazdany J, Bansback N, Clowse M, Collier D, Law K, Liao KP,

> et al.: Rheumatology informatics system for effectiveness: a national

> informatics-enabled registry for quality improvement,

> Arthritis Care

> Res

> 68(12):1866–1873, 2016.

> 22.	 Bruce B, Fries JF: The arthritis, rheumatism and aging medical

> information system (ARAMIS): still young at 30 years,

> Clin Exp

> Rheumatol

> 23(5 Suppl 39):S163–S167, 2005.

> 23.	 Arkema EV, Simard JF: Cohort profile: systemic lupus erythemato-

> sus in Sweden: the Swedish Lupus Linkage (SLINK) cohort,

> BMJ

> Open

> 5(8):e008259, 2015.

> 24.	 Torrente-Segarra V, Corominas H, Sánchez-Piedra C, et al.: Fibro-

> myalgia prevalence and associated factors in primary Sjögren’s

> syndrome patients in a large cohort from the Spanish Society of

> Rheumatology registry (SJOGRENSER),

> Clin Exp Rheumatol

> 35(Suppl 105):28–34, 2017 (3).

> 25.	 Leuvenink R, Aeschlimann F, Baer W, et al.: Clinical course and

> therapeutic approach to varicella zoster virus infection in children

> with rheumatic autoimmune diseases under immunosuppression,

> Pediatr Rheumatol Online J

> 14(1):34, 2016.

> 26.	 Robinson PC, Yazdany J: The COVID-19 Global Rheumatol-

> ogy Alliance: collecting data in a pandemic,

> Nat Rev Rheumatol

> 16(6):293–294, 2020.

> 27.	 Macfarlane GJ, Biallas R, Dean LE, Jones GT, Goodson NJ, Rotariu

> O: The risk of inflammatory bowel disease in patients with axial

> spondyloarthritis treated with biologic agents: BSRBR-AS and

> meta-analysis,

> J Rheumatol [Internet]

> , 2022.

> 28.	 Hetland ML: DANBIO: a nationwide registry of biological thera-

> pies in Denmark,

> Clin Exp Rheumatol

> 23(5 Suppl 39):S205–S207,

> 2005.

> 29.	 Fedeli U, Zoppini G, Goldoni CA, Avossa F, Mastrangelo G, Saugo

> M: Multiple causes of death analysis of chronic diseases: the example

> of diabetes,

> Popul Health Metr

> 13:21, 2015.

> 30.	 Falasinnu T, Rossides M, Chaichian Y, Simard JF: Do death cer-

> tificates underestimate the burden of rare diseases? The example of

> systemic lupus erythematosus mortality, Sweden, 2001-2013,

> Public

> Health Rep

> 133(4):481–488, 2018.

> 31.	 Sakharkar P, Ansari N: Application of exploratory factor analy-

> sis and item response theory to validate NHANES ADL scale in

> patients reporting rheumatoid arthritis,

> Pharmacy (Basel) [Internet]

> 10(6), 2022.

> 32.	 Wang J, Fan J, Yang Y, et  al.: Vitamin D status and risk of all-

> cause and cause-specific mortality in osteoarthritis patients: results

> from NHANES III and NHANES 2001-2018

> Nutrients [Internet]

> ,

> 14(21), 2022.

> 33.	 Guglielmo D, Hootman JM, Murphy LB, et al.: Health care pro-

> vider counseling for weight loss among adults with arthritis and

> overweight or obesity—United States, 2002-2014,

> MMWR Morb

> Mortal Wkly Rep

> 67(17):485–490, 2018.

> 34.	 Mittinty MM, Elliott JM, Hunter DJ, Nicholas MK, March LM,

> Mittinty MN: Explaining the gap in the experience of depres-

> sion among arthritis patients,

> Clin Rheumatol

> 41(4):1227–1233,

> 2022.

> 35.	 Grabich S, Farrelly E, Ortmann R, Pollack M, Wu SSJ: Real-world

> burden of systemic lupus erythematosus in the USA: a comparative

> cohort study from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)

> 2016-2018,

> Lupus Sci Med [Internet]

> 9(1), 2022.

> 36.	 Low CA: Harnessing consumer smartphone and wearable sensors

> for clinical cancer research,

> NPJ Digit Med

> 3:140, 2020.

> 37.	 van Wissen MAT, Berger MAM, Schoones JW, et al.: Reporting

> quality of interventions using a wearable activity tracker to improve

> physical activity in patients with inflammatory arthritis or osteoar-

> thritis: a systematic review,

> Rheumatol Int [Internet]

> , 2022.

> 38.	 Coravos A, Khozin S, Mandl KD: Developing and adopting safe and

> effective digital biomarkers to improve patient outcomes,

> NPJ Digit

> Med [Internet]

> 2(1), 2019.

> 39.	 Dos Santos Silva IM: Measures of occurrence of disease and other

> health-related events. In

> Cancer epidemiology: principles and methods

> ,

> International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1999.

> 40.	 Hootman JM, Helmick CG, Barbour KE, Theis KA, Boring MA:

> Updated projected prevalence of self-reported doctor-diagnosed

> arthritis and arthritis-attributable activity limitation among US

> adults, 2015-2040,

> Arthritis Rheumatol

> 68(7):1582–1587, 2016.

> 41.	 Rassen JA, Bartels DB, Schneeweiss S, Patrick AR, Murk W: Mea-

> suring prevalence and incidence of chronic conditions in claims

> and electronic health record databases,

> Clin Epidemiol

> 11:1–15,

> 2019.

> 42.	 Sharp SJ, Poulaliou M, Thompson SG, White IR, Wood AM: A

> review of published analyses of case-cohort studies and recommen-

> dations for future reporting,

> PLoS One

> 9(6):e101176, 2014.

> 43.	 Barlow WE, Ichikawa L, Rosner D, Izumi S: Analysis of case-cohort

> designs,

> J Clin Epidemiol

> 52(12):1165–1172, 1999.

> 44.	 Mittleman MA, Maclure M, Robins JM: Control sampling strate-

> gies for case-crossover studies: an assessment of relative efficiency,

> Am J Epidemiol

> 142(1):91–98, 1995.

> 45.	 Wang B, Wang H, Tu XM, Feng C: Comparisons of superiority,

> non-inferiority, and equivalence trials,

> Shanghai Arch Psychiatry

> 29(6):385–388, 2017.

> 46.	 Strait A, Castillo F, Choden S, et al.: Demographic characteristics

> of participants in rheumatoid arthritis randomized clinical trials: a

> systematic review,

> JAMA Netw Open

> 2(11):e1914745, 2019.

> 47.	 Falasinnu T, Chaichian Y, Bass MB, Simard JF: The representa-

> tion of gender and race/ethnic groups in randomized clinical trials

> of individuals with systemic lupus erythematosus [internet],

> Curr

> Rheumatol Rep

> , 2018.

> 48.	 Orbai AM, Bingham 3rd CO: Patient reported outcomes in rheu-

> matoid arthritis clinical trials,

> Curr Rheumatol Rep

> 17(4):28, 2015.

> 49.	 PROMIS [Internet]. [cited 2022 Dec 20]. Available from:

> https://

> www.healthmeasures.net/explore-measurement-systems/promis

> .

> 50.	 Hernán MA, Hernández-Díaz S, Robins JM: A structural approach

> to selection bias,

> Epidemiology

> 15(5):615–625, 2004.

> 51.	 Ahlbom A. Modern Epidemiology, ed 4. TL Lash, TJ VanderWeele,

> S Haneuse, KJ Rothman. Wolters Kluwer, 2021.

> Eur J Epidemiol

> .

> 36(8):767–768, 2021.

> 52.	 Celentano DD, Szklo M:

> Gordis epidemiology

> , Elsevier, 2019, p 420.

> 53.	 Friedman GD:

> Primer of epidemiology

> , ed 5, McGraw-Hill Educa-

> tion, 2004, p 401.

> 54.	 Becher H: The concept of residual confounding in regression models

> and some applications,

> Stat Med

> 11(13):1747–1758, 1992.

> 55.	 Groenwold RHH: Commentary: quantifying the unknown

> unknowns,

> Int J Epidemiol

> 49(5):1503–1505, 2020.

> 56.	 Brookhart MA, Stürmer T, Glynn RJ, Rassen J, Schneeweiss S:

> Confounding control in healthcare database research: challenges and

> potential approaches,

> Med Care

> 48(6 Suppl):S114–S120, 2010.

> 57.	 Uddin MJ, Groenwold RHH, Ali MS, de Boer A, Roes KCB,

> Chowdhury MAB, et al.: Methods to control for unmeasured con-

> founding in pharmacoepidemiology: an overview,

> Int J Clin Pharm

> 38(3):714–723, 2016.

> 58.	 Petri H, Urquhart J: Channeling bias in the interpretation of drug

> effects,

> Stat Med

> 10(4):577–581, 1991.

> 59.	 Minozzi S, Bonovas S, Lytras T, et al.: Risk of infections using anti-

> TNF agents in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and anky-

> losing spondylitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis [Internet],

> Expet Opin Drug Saf

> 15:11–34, 2016.

> 60.	 Simard JF, Mittleman MA, Shadick NA, Karlson EW: TNF-

> Α

> antagonist and infection in rheumatoid arthritis,

> Open J Rheumatol

> Autoimmune Dis

> 2:14–20, 2012.

> 61.	 Hill AB: The environment and disease: association or causation?

> Proc

> R Soc Med

> 58(5):295–300, 1965.

> 62.	 Hernán MA, Hernández-Díaz S, Werler MM, Mitchell AA: Causal

> knowledge as a prerequisite for confounding evaluation: an applica-

> tion to birth defects epidemiology,

> Am J Epidemiol

> 155(2):176–184,

> 2002.

> 63.	 Mantel N, Haenszel W: Statistical aspects of the analysis of data

> from retrospective studies of disease,

> J Natl Cancer Inst

> 22(4):719–

> 748, 1959.

> 64.	 Grayson DA: Confounding confounding1,

> Am J Epidemiol

> 126(3):546–553, 1987.

> 65.	 Silva-Fernández L, De Cock D, Lunt M, BSRBR-RA Contributors

> Group, et al.: Serious infection risk after 1 year between patients

> with rheumatoid arthritis treated with rituximab or with a second

> TNFi after initial TNFi failure: results from the British Society for

> Rheumatology Biologics Register for Rheumatoid Arthritis,

> Rheu-

> matology

> 57(9):1533–1540, 2018.

> 66.	 Kleinbaum DG, Kupper LL, Nizam A, Rosenberg ES:

> Applied regres-

> sion analysis and other multivariable methods

> , Cengage Learning,

> 2013, p 1072.

> 67.	 Sun GW, Shook TL, Kay GL: Inappropriate use of bivariable analy-

> sis to screen risk factors for use in multivariable analysis,

> J Clin Epi-

> demiol

> 49(8):907–916, 1996.

> 68.	 Kim J, Shin W. How to do random allocation (randomization).

> Clin

> Orthop Surg [Internet].

> 2014; Available from:

> https://synapse.kore-

> amed.org/articles/1050223

> .

> 69.	 Efird J: Blocked randomization with randomly selected block sizes,

> Int J Environ Res Public Health

> 8(1):15–20, 2011.

> 70.	 Almaghlouth I, Pullenayegum E, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, John-

> son SR: Propensity score methods in rare disease: a demonstration

> using observational data in systemic lupus erythematosus,

> J Rheuma-

> tol

> 48(3):321–325, 2021.

> 71.	 Pincus D, Jenkinson R, Paterson M, Leroux T, Ravi B: Associa-

> tion between surgical approach and major surgical complications

> in patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty,

> JAMA

> 323(11):1070–

> 1076, 2020.

> 72.	 Johnson SR, Tomlinson GA, Hawker GA, Granton JT, Feldman

> BM: Propensity score methods for bias reduction in observational

> studies of treatment effect,

> Rheum Dis Clin North Am

> 44(2):203–

> 213, 2018.

> 73.	 Austin PC: An introduction to propensity score methods for reduc-

> ing the effects of confounding in observational studies,

> Multivariate

> Behav Res

> 46(3):399–424, 2011.

> 74.	 Austin PC, Stuart EA: Moving towards best practice when using

> inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) using the pro-

> pensity score to estimate causal treatment effects in observational

> studies,

> Stat Med

> 34(28):3661–3679, 2015.

> 75.	 Robins JM, Hernán MA, Brumback B: Marginal structural models

> and causal inference in epidemiology,

> Epidemiology

> 11(5):550–560,

> 2000.

> 76.	 Brookhart MA, Rassen JA, Schneeweiss S: Instrumental variable

> methods in comparative safety and effectiveness research,

> Pharma-

> coepidemiol Drug Saf

> 19(6):537–554, 2010.

> 77.	 Pokropek A: Introduction to instrumental variables and their appli-

> cation to large-scale assessment data,

> Large-scale Assess Edu

> 4(1):1–

> 20, 2016.

> 78.	 Kim D, Baum CF, Ganz ML, Subramanian SV, Kawachi I: The

> contextual effects of social capital on health: a cross-national instru-

> mental variable analysis,

> Soc Sci Med

> 73(12):1689–1697, 2011.

> 79.	 Fish JS, Ettner S, Ang A, Brown AF: Association of perceived

> neighborhood safety on body mass index,

> Am J Public Health

> 100(11):2296–2303, 2010.

> 80.	 Schneeweiss S: Sensitivity analysis and external adjustment for

> unmeasured confounders in epidemiologic database studies of thera-

> peutics,

> Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf

> 15(5):291–303, 2006.

> 81.	 Forbess LJ, Rossides M, Weisman MH, Simard JF: New-onset non-

> infectious pulmonary manifestations among patients with systemic

> lupus erythematosus in Sweden,

> Arthritis Res Ther

> 21(1):48, 2019.

> 82.	 Lipsitch M, Tchetgen Tchetgen E, Cohen T: Negative controls: a

> tool for detecting confounding and bias in observational studies,

> Epidemiology

> 21(3):383–388, 2010.

> 83.	 Groenwold RHH, Nelson DB, Nichol KL, Hoes AW, Hak E: Sen-

> sitivity analyses to estimate the potential impact of unmeasured

> confounding in causal research,

> Int J Epidemiol

> 39(1):107–117,

> 2010.

> 84.	 Phillips CV: Quantifying and reporting uncertainty from systematic

> errors,

> Epidemiology

> 14(4):459–466, 2003.

> 85.	 VanderWeele TJ, Robins JM: Four types of effect modification:

> a classification based on directed acyclic graphs,

> Epidemiology

> 18(5):561–568, 2007.

> 86.	 VanderWeele TJ: On the distinction between interaction and effect

> modification,

> Epidemiology

> 20(6):863–871, 2009.

> 87.	 Söderlin MK, Petersson IF, Geborek P: The effect of smoking on

> response and drug survival in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated

> with their first anti-TNF drug [Internet].

> Scand J Rheumatol

> 41:

> 1–9, 2012.

> 88.	 Breslow NE: The analysis of case-control studies,

> Stat Methods Can-

> cer Res

> 248–279, 1980.

> 89.	 VanderWeele TJ, Knol MJ: A tutorial on interaction,

> Epidemiol

> Method

> 3(1):33–72, 2014.

> 90.	 Andersson T, Alfredsson L, Källberg H, Zdravkovic S, Ahlbom

> A: Calculating measures of biological interaction,

> Eur J Epidemiol

> 20(7):575–579, 2005.

> 91.	 Knol MJ, VanderWeele TJ: Recommendations for presenting analy-

> ses of effect modification and interaction,

> Int J Epidemiol

> 41(2):514–

> 520, 2012.

> 92.	 Choi BCK: The past, present, and future of public health surveil-

> lance,

> Scientifica

> 2012, 2012:875253.

> 93.	 Izmirly PM, Ferucci ED, Somers EC, et  al.: Incidence rates of

> systemic lupus erythematosus in the USA: estimates from a meta-

> analysis of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National

> Lupus Registries,

> Lupus Sci Med [Internet]

> 8(1), 2021.

> 94.	 Somers EC, Marder W, Cagnoli P, et al.: Population-based inci-

> dence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus: the Michigan

> Lupus Epidemiology and Surveillance program,

> Arthritis Rheumatol

> 66(2):369–378, 2014.

> 95.	 Arkema EV, Jönsen A, Rönnblom L, Svenungsson E, Sjöwall C,

> Simard JF: Case definitions in Swedish register data to identify sys-

> temic lupus erythematosus,

> BMJ Open

> 6(1):e007769, 2016.
